
 Declaring the syntax
-----------------------

### Simple booleans

TODO broken link
For a full reference on syntax, see the [reference manual on syntax](#syntax)

A program is nothing more then a string of a specific form. To describe strings of an arbitrary structure, *BNF* [^BNF] can be used.

[^BNF]: Backus-Naur-form, as introduced by John Backus in the ALGOL60-report. 
TODO reference

The syntax of our programming language is defined in the **Syntax**section of _STFL.language_:

$$STFLBool.language![1..8]!file


What do we write here? Let's start with declaring the boolean values `True` and `False`. We express how these can be parsed by writing `$$STFLBool.language!10`. This tells the tool that a syntactic form named `bool` exists, and it is either `True` of `False`.
Note the double quotes, these are important to indicate that we want literally this string. The `|` epxresses that it can choose between those forms.

_STFL.language_ now looks like:

$$STFLBool.language![1..10]!file

Lets try running this! Create `examples.stfl`, with in it:

$$examples.stfl![1..2]!file

We can parse these by running (in your terminal) `./ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl bool -l`. The first argument is the language file, the second the examples, the `bool` tells ALGT what syntactic rule to parse. The `-l` flag expresses that each line should be treated individually.

If all went well, you should get the following output:

$$($$STFLBool.language![1..10] $$examples.stfl![1..2] bool -l)

The most interesting part here is that `True` has been parsed with `bool.0`, thus the first choice of the `bool`-form, while `False` has been parsed with the second form.



### If-statements



Now, let's add expressions of the form `If True Then False Else True`. We define a new syntactic form: `expr	 ::= "If" bool "Then" bool "Else" bool`.[^spaces] This tell _ALGT_ that an expression starts with a literal `If`, is followed by a `bool` (so either `True` or `False`), is followed by a literal `Then`, ... The tool uses the double quotes `"` to distinguish between a literal string and another syntactic form.


[^spaces]: Don't worry about spaces and tabs, we deal with them. If you want need to parse stuff like "duizendeneen" or whitespace sensitive languages, please refer to the [reference manual](#syntax) TODO Broken link


_STFL.language_ now looks like:

$$STFLBoolSimpleExpr.language![1..11]!file


This captures already some example expressions. Let's add `$$examples.stfl!3` to _examples.stfl_:

$$examples.stfl![1..3]!file

And lets run our tool, this time with `./ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl` **expr** `-l`

$$($$STFLBool.language![1..11] $$examples.stfl![1..3] expr -l)


Oops! Seems like our parser now always wants to see a `If` in the beginning, and can't handle `True` anymore. Perhaps we should tell that a `bool` is a valid expression to:

$$STFLBoolSimpleExpr.language![6..11]!file


Lets see what this gives:

$$($$STFLBool.language![1..12] $$examples.stfl![1..3] expr -l)![6..]

Looks a lot better! The third example shows clearly how the expression falls apart in smaller pieces.



What with a nested `If`?

`$$examples.stfl!4` clearly can't be parsed, as the condition should be a `bool`, according to our current syntax.

Well, we can just write `expr` instead of `bool` in our syntax:

$$STFLBool.language![11..12]!file

Running this gives

$$($$STFLBool.language![1..12] $$examples.stfl!4 expr -l)

This clearly shows how the parse trees are nested. 
This can be rendered too:[^ptsvg] 

![ParseTree of a nested condition[^ptsvg]]$$svg($$STFLBool.language![1..12] $$examples.stfl!4 expr -l --ptsvg ParseTreeNested){width=100%}


[^ptsvg]: These images can be created with `ALGT STLF.language examples.stfl -l --ptsvg Outputname`


### Adding numbers, subtyping and forbidden left recursion

Time to spice things up with numbers. To make things easier, integers are built in as `Number`. It's good practice to introduce a new syntactic rule for them:

$$STFLrec.language!11!file

As an `int` is a valid expression, we add it to the `expr` form:

$$STFLrec.language![12..14]!file 

Note that every `int` now also is an `expr`, just as every `bool` is an `expr`. This typing relationship can be visualized with `ALGT STFL.language -lsvg Subtyping.svg`[^slowsvgs] :

![Subtyping relation of STFL.language]$$svg($$STFLrec.language![1..14] --lsvg Subtyping.svg){width=25%}

[^slowsvgs]: Creating this svg might take a long time for complicated syntaxes, as ALGT calculates the ordering of labels resulting in the least intersecting lines.




Now that numbers have been added, let's run this with a number as example:

$$examples.stfl!5!file

should give

$$($$STFLrec.language![1..14] $$examples.stfl!5 expr -l)


So far, so good! Time to add addition:

$$STFLrec.language![12..14]!file 
		| expr "+" expr

We add some example:

$$examples.stfl![6..7]!file


And run it:

$$($$STFLrec.language![1..15] $$examples.stfl!6 expr -l)

Oops! Looks like we did something wrong. What is this left recursion?
Whenever the parser want to parse an expression, it tries every choice from left to right. This means that whenever it tries to parse `expr`, it should first try to parse `expr`. That's not really helpfull, so the parser might get in an infinite loop then. 

Also, not allowing left recursion also means that no loops in the subtypings occur. In other words, the subtyping relationship is a [lattice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice_(order)).

The solution to this problem is splitting `expr` in two parts: a `term` with simple elements in front, and `expr` with advanced forms:

$$STFLWrongOrder.language![13..17]!file

Let's retry this:

$$($$STFLWrongOrder.language![1..17] $$examples.stfl!6 expr -l)

What went wrong this time? The parser tries choice after choice. When parsing `20 + 22` against `expr ::= term | term "+" term`, it'll first try `term` (and not `term "+" term`). It succesfully parses `20` against the single `term`, thus the input string `+ 22` is left. The parser doesn't know what to do with this leftover part, so we get an error.

To fix this, we change the order:

$$STFLInt.language![13..14]!file

When we try again, we get:

$$($$STFLInt.language![1..17] $$examples.stfl![6..7] expr -l)


![Parsetree of `20+22`]$$svg($$STFLInt.language![1..17] $$examples.stfl!6 expr -l --ptsvg Parsetree6){width=50%}


![Parsetree of `1 + 2 + 3`]$$svg($$STFLInt.language![1..17] $$examples.stfl!7 expr -l --ptsvg Parsetree7){width=50%}



### Lambda expressions

The lambda expression is the last syntactic form we'd like to add. Recall that these look like `(\x : Int . x + 1)`. 

#### Variables

The first thing we should deal with, are variables. A builtin is provided for those, namely `Identifiers`, matching all words starting with a lowercase (matching `$$regexIdentifier`). Let's introduce them in our syntax:

$$STFL.language!15!file

A `var` is a valid in expressions too, e.g. in the expression `x + 1`, so we want to add it to our `term`:

$$STFL.language!22,[24..26]!file

#### Types

The second ingredient we still need, are types, to annotated the input types. Valid types, for starters, are `Bool` and `Int`.

But what is the type of `(\x : Int . x + 1)`? It's something that takes an `Int` and gives back an `Int`. We type this as `Int -> Int`.

And what is the type of a function, taking another function as an argument? That would be, for example, `(Int -> Int) -> Int`, meaning we need to add a form with parentheses.

Recalling the trouble we had with left recursion and ordering, we write `type` as following: 

$$STFL.language![10..11]!file


Some examples of types are:


![]$$svg($$STFL.language![1..27] $$typeExamples.stfl!1 type -l --ptsvg Parsetree0){width=50%}
![]$$svg($$STFL.language![1..27] $$typeExamples.stfl!2 type -l --ptsvg Parsetree1){width=50%}

![]$$svg($$STFL.language![1..27] $$typeExamples.stfl!3 type -l --ptsvg Parsetree2){width=50%}
![]$$svg($$STFL.language![1..27] $$typeExamples.stfl!4 type -l --ptsvg Parsetree3){width=50%}





### Lambda expressions

Now we have what we need to define lambda expressions. As they act as a term, we add it there:

$$STFL.language![22..26]!file

Backslash is the escape character, so use two of them to represent a single backslash.


As last, we can apply arguments to a lambda expression. We expand `expr`:

$$STFL.language![17..19]!file




### What about nonsensical input?

With the current syntax, expresions as `If 5 Then True else False`, `True + 5`, `True 5` or `(\x : Int : x + 1) True` can be written.
We allow these forms to be parsed, as the next stage of the compiler (the typechecker) will catch these errors. How to construct this, will be explained in a following section. TODO Link


### Recap

Our _STFL.language_ contains

$$STFL.language!file

Our _examples.stfl_ contains

$$examples.stfl!file

We run this with

 - `ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl expr -l` to show the parsetrees
 - `ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl expr -l --ptsvg SVGnames` to render the parsetrees as SVG
 - `ALGT STFL.language --lsvg SVGname.svg` to visualize the subtyping relationship.

![The final subtyping relationship of STFL.language]$$svg($$STFL.language --lsvg FinalSubtyping.svg)






