
 Functions
-----------

### Substitution

To work with lambda expressions, we have to replace a variable in an expression by some other expression.

For example, we might want to replace `x` by `42`:

Input expression			Output expression
----------------			-----------------
`x`					`42`
`x + 1`					`42 + 1`
`If True Then x Else 0`			`If true Then 42 Else 0`
`(\\b : Bool . If b Then x Else y)` 	`(\\b : Bool . If b Then 42 Else y)` 


Let's define this function!

### The function section

We add a new header to _STFL.language_:

$$STFL.language![30..32]!file

In this function section, we give an attempt to define _subs_:

$$STFL.language![38..42]!file



#### Function declaration

So, what is going on here? Let's first take a look to the first line, the _function declaration_:

$$STFL.language!37!file

The `subs` is the name of the function. The `var -> expr -> expr -> expr` indicates the type of this function: it takes three arguments (namely a `var`, an `expr` and another `expr`) and gives calculates an `expr` with this. The syntactic form after the last arrow is always what is returned. [^ISMETA]

[^ISMETA]: You probably noticed the similarity between the types declared in our own STFL and this declaration. This is intentional.

#### Pattern matching

Now, take a closer look to the second line of this function:

$$STFL.language!38!file 

This thing is called a _clause_. When `subs("someVar", 42, "True")` is called, the parsetree `"someVar"` is named `x`, `42` is named `e` and `"True"` is matched against `"True"`. As these are the same, the patterns match and the right-hand side of the clause (that is right of the `=`) is returned; in this case `"True"`.


What happens if this clause doesn't match, e.g. for `subs("someVar", 42, "False")`? In that case, we check if the next pattern does match.


