Properties
----------------

The last fundamental part of our language are it's properties.

Arbitrary properties can be stated just as rules can. 

ALGT will check that these properties hold, by trying a bunch of random examples, effectively quickchecking your language implementation.


Most languages are concerned about two properties: _preservation_ and _progress_.

### Stating Preservation

_Preservation_ is the property that, when an expression `e0` of type `T` is evaluated, the new expression `e1` is still of type `T`. Without this property, our typechecker would be useless...

Now, we can state this property in the `Properties`-section of the file:

TODO lines
$$STFL.language!file

As our implementation is correct, we can just run our program as following, and see it did try to proof us wrong:

TODO
$$($$STFL.language)

We can ask ALGT to try more examples, with the `--quickcheck-runs NUMBER-OF-RUNS` flag:

TODO
$$($$STFL.language --quickcheck-runs 25)

Pfew, luckily we didn't find a counter example.

### Stating progress

Another important property is _progress_. It states that, if an expression is well-typed, we can  either in canonical form (a simple value, the result of our calculation).

### Testing examples from a file against a property

### Disabling quickchecks and symbolic checks

If the quickchecks take to long, you can disable them, using `--quickcheck-runs 0`. When the other checks takes to long (liveability and totality), add `--no-check` to disable them all.
