
\thispagestyle{empty}

\chapter*{Abstract (English)}

Gradual typing is a promising technique which offers programmers the freedom to have both typed and untyped code working together seamlessly. 
However, little such gradual programming languages exists, because designing gradual typesystems is difficult. This is caused by both a lack of understanding of these typesystems and a lack of tools helping developing them. 

\medskip

If more gradual programming languages would exist, programmers would be more productive, as they are able to choose for each part of their code if it would benefit the most from a dynamic or static approach. On a longer timeframe, the programmer can migrate their codebase from or to a fully dynamic to a static one as is needed.


\medskip

In Ronald Garcia's paper, _Abstracting Gradual Typing_, a way to gradualize typesystems is proposed. In this dissertation, a new tool is presented which implements the necessary abstract interpretation of this paper.

The introduced tool uses a new metalanguage to easily specify programming languages and helps to construct a gradual variant of the language. Apart from the gradualization, the tool offers support for general language design, such as interpretation of target programs, typechecking and property verification.

\medskip

To verify the usefullness of the tool, a simple, functional language was implemented. During this development, many bugs were caught by the automatic checks.
Based on the functional language, a gradual counterpart was developed with support of the tool.

\blankpage
