
 Representing arbitrary programming languages
----------------------------------------------

_Program Language Design_ is a vast and intriguing field. As this field starts to mature, a common jargon is starting to emerge among researchers to formally pin down programming languages and concepts. In this section, a short overview is given of what techniques are in use today and how these evolved historically.

### Describing syntax

The process of formally describing programming languages has its root in linguistics, the scientific study of natural languages. Linguistics has been a research topic for millenia: the first known linguist, Pāṇini lived between the 6th and 4th century BCE in India \cite{HistoryLinguistics}. He described Sanskrit using a notation with equivalent power as techniques in use today.\cite{PaniniBNF} 

The first Western linguist whom studied language using the underlying block structure was Noam Chomsky. Chomsky tried, amongst other approaches, to create a generative grammar for English. These generative grammars would later be named _context free grammars. Sadly, Chomsky concluded that such grammars are not powerfull enough to capture all the complexities of natural languages\cite{chomsky1956three} such as English.

Despite this failure, context free grammars are all but useless: they are an excellent vehicle to describe the syntax of programming languages. John Backus created a straightforward way to describe context free grammars, which he formalized together with Peter Naur as Backus-Naur-Form or BNF. BNF was introduced to the world in 1960, when the syntax of ALGOL60 was specified formally using BNF in the famous ALGOL60 report \cite{BackusNaur}. Due to its simplicity and ease of use, BNF has become a standard tool for any language designer and has been used throughout the field of computer science.

### Describing semantics

All programs achieve an effect when run. This effect is created by some sort of transformation of the world, such as the manipulation of files, screen output, activation of a motor, playing sound, .... The calculation of an expression is an effect as well, as the human interpreting the result will act accordingly.

This effect is what gives meaning to a program. The meaning of any program, thus of the language as a whole, is called the **semantics** of that language.  

Describing this effect is not as straightforward as describing the syntax. Since the end of 1960, various techniques and frameworks have been proposed to describe semantics.  

- The first, rather informal way to describe semantics is by __translating__ a language into another another language. This translation is not practical when carried out by humans, but tremendously usefull when done by a computer as this takes away the need to work directly with machine code. The first such system, _Speedcode_ by John Backus \cite{speedcode}, translated higher-level statements and executed them on IBM 701 machines.
- The first formal, mathematical framework to describe semantics was introduced in 1968 by the ALGOL68-report \cite{ALGOL68}. ALGOL68 was the first language to have a full formal definition of the semantics using the mathematical framework that is known today as __operational semantics__.
- Another mathematical framework to describe semantics was introduced a year later by C.A.R. Hoare \cite{HoareAxiomatic}, in which he introduces an __axiomatic framework__ to describe programming languages.
- The last approach capturing semantics still widely used today was introduced in 1971 by Dana Scott and Christopher Strachey. They introduce the technique to translate the program to a mathematical object (such as a function, transforming the input to the output), giving rise to __denotational semantics__ \cite{ScottStrachey}.

Of course, all these techniques have their own benefits and drawbacks.

#### Translation to another language

The first way to let a target program transform the world, is by translating the program from the target language to a host language (such as machine code, assembly, C, ...). Afterwards, this translated program can be executed on a real-life machine.
Such translation is necessary to create programs executing as fast as possible on real hardware. However, proving a property about the target program becomes cumbersome:

- First, the host language should be modelled and a translation from target to host language defined
- Then, an analogous property of the host language should be proven
- Third, it should be proven that the translation preserves the property.

Although this is possible, this dissertation is focused on theoretical properties and automatic transformation of a programming language. These would become needlessly complicated using this technique, thus it is not considered here.


#### Denotational semantics

The second way to give meaning to a program, are denotational semantics. Denotational semantics try to give a target program meaning by using a _mathematical object_ representing the program. Such a mathematical object could be a function, which behaves (in the mathematical world) as the target program behaves on real data.

The main problem with this approach is that a _mathematical object_ is, by its very nature, intangable and can only described by some _syntactic notation_. Trying to capture mathematics result in the creation of a new formal language (such as FunMath), thus only moving the problem of giving semantics to the new language. Furthermore, it still has all the issues of translation as mentioned above.


#### Axiomatic semantics

Axiomatic semantics, introduced by C.A.R. Hoare \cite{HoareAxiomatic}, do not give the state changes explicitly, but rather describe the changes on assumed properties of the state. This often happens in the form of Hoare triples, which consist of the preconditions, program and postconditions - the conditions which should be met before the program execution, so that the state after program execution yields the given postconditions.

This moves the problem of semantics from the target language onto a host language, apart from the need to proof properties of the host language. 


#### Structural operational semantics

Structural operational semantics tries to give meaning to the entire target program by giving meaning to each of the parts\cite{Plotkin81astructural}. This can be done in an inherently syntactic way, thus without leaving ALGT. 

- Expressions without state (such as `5 + 6`) can be evaluated by replacing them with their result (`11`).
- Imperative programs are given meaning by modelling a state. This state is a syntacic form which acts as data structure, possibly containing a variable store, the output, a file system... Each statement of the imperative language has an effect on this state, which can now be formalized too.

Operational semantics is the most straightforward approach for this dissertation, as will be noted in section \ref{natural-deduction}. Using this framework, semantics for a simple programming language will be constructed in section \ref{defining-smallstep}.




### Mechanized checking of syntax and semantics

Researchers often use BNF to specify the syntax and one of the above frameworks to denote semantics, but in an informal way: the semantics are denoted in \LaTeX\ for publication. This is error-prone, as no mechanical checks are performed on their work. 

This habit is changing lately as programming language researchers are starting to use various tools to automate this task. There are two broad categories of those tools:

- On one hand, theorem provers are used to automate the reasoning about the semantics: tools such as COQ and Isabelle are gaining popularity in the field, checking correctness proofs of the languages, but are quite complicated to use.
- On the other hand are lightweight tools used, optimized for language design. These tools help with typesetting, translation to the theorem provers or other smaller tasks, in a simple and easy metalanguage.

A review of these tools can be found in section \ref{related-work}.

