
 Static versus dynamic languages
---------------------------------

A tradeoff all programming languages make is the choice between static and dynamic typing, thus whether type errors are searched and detected before running the program or cause crashes during execution.

For example, consider the erronous expression `0.5 + True`. 

A programming language with __static typing__, such as Java, will point out this error to the developer, even before running the program. A dynamic programming language, such as Python, will happily start executing the program, only crashing when it attempts to calculate the value.

This dynamic behaviour can cause bugs to go undedected for a long time, such as the bug hidden in the following Python snippet. Can you spot it [^pythonBug]?


	if some_rare_condition:
		list = list.sort()
	x = list[0]


[^pythonBug]: `list.sort()` will sort the list in memory and return `void`. `list = list.sort()` thus results in `list` being `void`. The correct code is either `list = list.sorted()` or `list.sort()` (without assignment).

Python will happily execute this snippet, until `some_rare_condition` is met and the bug is triggered - perhaps after months in production.

Java, on the other hand, will quickly surface this bug with a compiler error and even refuse to start the code altogether:


	List<Integer> list = ...
	if(someRareCondition){
		// Error: Type mismatch: cannot convert from void to List
		list = list.sort(intComparator);
	}
	int x	= list.get(0)


The strongest guarantee the typechecker gives is that code will not crash due to type errors. Furthermore, having precise type information gives other benefits, such as compiler optimizations, code suggestions, ease of refactoring, ...

However, this typechecker has a cost to the programmer. First, types should be stated explicitly and slows down programming. Second, some valid programs can't be written anymore. While typechecking is a good tool in the long run to maintain large programs, it is a burden when creating small programs.

Per result, programs often start their life as a small _proof of concept_ in a dynamic language. When more features are requested, the program steadily grows beyond the point it can do without static typechecker - but when it's already to cumbersome and expensive to rewrite it in a statically typed language.

 Gradual typesystems
----------------------


Static or dynamic typing shouldn't be a binary choice. By using a _gradual_ type system \cite{GradualTypingSiek}, some parts of the code might be statically typed - giving all the guarantees and checks of a static programming language; while other parts can dynamically typed - giving more freedom and speed to development. A program where all type annotations are given will offer the same guarantees as a static language, a program without type annotations is just as free as a dynamic program.
This means that the developer has the best of both worlds and can migrate the codebase either way as needed:

	
	// This is statically typed
	List<Integer> list = new ArrayList<>()
	if(someRareCondition){
		// Error: Type mismatch: cannot convert from void to List
		list = list.sort(intComparator);
	}

	// This is dynamic
	? x	= list.get(0)

	
	x	= "Some string"
	System.out.println(x + True)
	

Very little gradual programming languages exist, because creating a gradual type system is a hard.

While gradual typing has been a research topic for decades \cite{Thatte:1989:QT:96709.96747}, it is not widely known nor well understood. Based on the recent paper of Ronald Garcia, __Abstracting Gradual Typing__ \cite{GarciaAGT}, we attempt to _automate gradual typing_ of arbitrary programming languages, based on the tool above.

