
Main contribution
----------------

In this master dissertation, a new tool is presented which allows the design of arbitrary programming languages and helps gradualizing them. This tool, ALGT, is a new programming language designed for the rapid development of (gradual) programming languages. 

\medskip

Specifying programming languages is done using a lightweight denotation, capturing both the syntax and semantics in a formally correct way. This  **new metalanguage for programming languages** is optimized for ease of use, minimizing boiler plate and unneeded elements. In chapter \ref{algt-in-a-nutshell}, a small functional language is specified using this metalanguage. 

\medskip

Using a given specification, the tool can **automatically build an interpreter** for this language: The grammar is used to construct a parser for the target program whereas the semantics are used to interpret said program. Readers interested in the machinery to achieve this, can find the algorithms to achieve this in chapter \ref{implementation-of-algt}. 

\medskip

Based on the syntax of a language, an algorithm for **syntax driven abstract interpretation** is presented in chapter \ref{syntax-driven-abstract-interpretation}. This framework allows the analysis of metafunctions over a set of values in one pass. Apart from enabling some extra checks of the specification, it is a major step to automatic gradualization.

\medskip

**Automated gradualization** is demonstrated in chapter \ref{gradualization-of-stfl}, where the earlier introduced functional language is transformed into its gradual counterpart. For easily transforming the language, a _language-changes_ format is introduced which describes the differences between two dialects. The construction this file is aided by the abstract interpretation framework.

\medskip

At last, the metalanguage, tool and gradualization are evaluated in chapter \ref{algt-as-tool-for-language-design}. 
