
Feature comparison
------------------

In the following table, a comparison of the related work is provided.
\\
The **metalanguage** is the language which handles the next steps, such as declaring a reduction rule or a typechecker.

- The metalanguage is _focused_ is parsetrees can be modified with little or no boilerplate.
- The metalanguage is _simple_ if it requires little extra knowlegde, e.g. knowlegde of a host programming language.
- If type-errors are detected in the metalanguage, then it is _typechecked_. This is important, as it prevents construction of malformed parsetrees and other easily preventable errors.

The second aspect is the **parsing** of the target language, which takes into account:

- _BNF-oriented_ implies that the tool constructs a parser based on a context free grammer, described in BNF or equivalent format.
- _Light-syntax_ indicates if the grammer syntax contains little boilerplate and without extra annotations which might confuse an unexperienced reader.
- _Parsetree-abstraction_ indicates that the user never has to create a datatype for the parsetree and that the parsetree is automatically constructed.

To **execute** the programming language, following aspects are considered:

- _Correctness_ implies that the metalanguage tries to ease reasoning about the semantics
- _Immediate feedback_ means that as much usefull feedback is given as soon as possible, such as warnings for possible errors
- _Cross-platform_ execution of the target language is possible, e.g. by having an interpreter available on all major platforms.
- _Debug information or traces_ are usefull when prototyping a new language, to gain insights in how exactly a program execution went.

Constructing the **typechecker** should be considered too:

- Preferably, the typechecker can be constructed using the same metaconstructions as the interpreter
- Automatic and/or randomized tests should be performed
- The tools should gradualize or help gradualizing the typesystem

At last, **tooling** is explored, which describes the practical ease of use. This takes into account:

- How long _installation_ took and how easy it was.
- If good _documentation_ is easily available.
- If the program runs on _multiple platforms_ (only tested on Linux).
- Whether a _syntax higlighter_ exists for the created language.
- An option to render the typesystem as \LaTeX results in a checkmark for _typesetting_.



\begin{landscape}
\input{Comparison.tex}
\end{landscape}
