
Natural deduction 
-----------------

The syntax describes what a language looks like. However, this does not give _meaning_ to a program. Meaning is given to a program by transformation, either transformation of state or by transformation of the expression itself - such as reducing to the canonical form, which is the result of the computation.

This transformation can be obtained by many means:

- translation to another language
- Denotational semantics
- Structural operational semantics
- Axiomatic semantics

Translation from the target language to a host language (machine code, assembly, C, ...) can be done by building the host language in ALGT and then defining a translation relation between the target and host language. The target program can then be translated by ALGT and be executed on a physical machine. While necessary to create programs which run as fast as possible on real hardware, it complicates matters for theoritical purposes. Using this approach, proving properties about the target language would involve first proving an analogous property of the host language, followed by proving that the translation preserves the property.

Denotational semantics injects meaning to a target language by attaching a mathematical object to each language construct. The main problem with this approach is that a _mathematical object_ is, by its very nature, intangable and only described by some other _syntactic notation_. Trying to capture mathematics would result in the creation of a new programming language (such as FunMath), only moving the problem of giving semantics to the new language, in addition to the problems as mentioned above). 

%% TODO reference 






All are possible, all use natural deduction, using inference rules.

Given inference rules, ALGT attempts to construct a proof with given input.

Logic specified by inference rules is turing complete.

%% TODO Should this be proven? This would be trivially done by constructing a turing machine language

### Relations and modes




### Semantics



### Typechecker






Automatic checks
---------------
