\clearpage

### Typechecker

A typechecker checks expressions for constructions which don't make sense, such as `1 + True`. This is tremendously usefull to catch errors in a static way, before even running the program.

In this section, a typechecker for STFL is constructed, using the same notation as introduced in the previous section. Just like the relation `→`, which related two expressions, a relation `::` is defined which relates expression to its type. The relation `::` is thus a relation in `expr × type`.

Examples of elements in this relation are:

expression		type
----------		----
`True`			`Bool`
`If True Then 0 Else 1`	`Int`
`(\ x : Int . x + 1)`	`Int -> Int`
`1 + 1`			`Int`
`1 + True`		_undefined, type error_

However, this relation can't handle variables. When a variable is declared, its type should be saved somehow and passed as argument with the relation.
Saving the types of declared variables is done by keeping a **typing environment**, which is a syntacical form acting as list. As a reminder, it is defined as:

$$$stfl.language!38,39!file

A new relation `(⊢)` is introduced, taking the expression to type and a typing environment to deduce the type of an expression. Some example elements in this relation are:

expression		Typing environment		type
----------		------------------		----
`True`			`{}`				`Bool`
`x`			`x : Bool, {}`			`Bool`
`If True Then 0 Else 1`	`x : Bool, {}`			`Int`
`(\ x : Int . x + 1)`	`{}`				`Int -> Int`
`1 + 1`			`y : Int, {}`			`Int`
`1 + True`		`{}`				_undefined, type error_


### Declaration of :: and ⊢

Implementing these relations begins (again) with declaring the relations.

Both `::` and `⊢` have an `expr` and a `type` argument. In both cases, `expr` can't be of mode `out`, as an infinite number of expressions exist for any given type. On the other hand, each given expression can only have one corresponding type, so the `type`-argument can be of mode `out`. The typing environment argument has mode `in` just as well; as infinite many typing environments might lead to a correct typing, namely all environments containing unrelated variables.

The actual declaration thus is as following:

$$$stfl.language!116,118!file



### Definition of ⊢

The heavy lifting is done by `⊢`, which will try to deduce a type for each syntacic concstruction, resulting in a single natural deduction rule for each of them.
As a reminder, the following syntacic forms exist in STFL and are typed:

- Booleans
- Integers
- Expressions within parens
- Addition
- If-expressions
- Type ascription
- Variables
- Lambda abstractions
- Function application

Each of these will get a typing rule in the following paragraphs. In these rules, `Γ` will always denote the typing environment. Checking types for equality is done with a custom equality relation `==`, which simply passes its arguments into the function `equate`, which was defined earlier:

	 equate(T1, T2)
	---------------- [Eq]
	 T1 == T2

#### Typing booleans

Basic booleans, such as `True` and `False` can be typed right away:

$$$stfl.language![200..202]!file

Here, `Γ` denotes the typing environment (which is not used in this rule); `b` is the expression and `"Bool"` is the type of that expression. In order to force that `b` is only `"True"` or `"False"`, the predicate `b:bool` is used.

#### Typing integers

The rule typing integers is completely analogously, with a predicate checking that `n` is a `number`:

$$$stfl.language![195..197]!file

#### Typing parens

An expression of the form `(e)` has the same type as tye enclosed expression `e`. This can be expressed with a predicate typing the enclosed expression:

$$$stfl.language![206..208]!file

#### Typing addition

Just like a number, an addition is always an `Int`. There is a catch though, namely that both arguments should be `Int` too. This is stated in the predicates of the rule:

$$$stfl.language![221..223]!file

#### Typing if

A functional `If`-expression has the same type as the expressions it might return. This introduces a constraint: namely that the expression in the if-branch has the same type as the expression in the else-branch. Furthermore, the condition should be a boolean, resulting in the four predicates of the rule:

$$$stfl.language![226..228]!file

#### Type ascription

Typing a type ascription boils down to typing the nested expression and checking that the nested expression has the same type as is asserted:

$$$stfl.language![211..213]!file


#### Variables

Variables are typed by searching the corresponding typing in the typing environment. This searching is implemented by the evaluation context, as `Γ[x ":" T]` will search a subtree matching a variable named `x` in the store. When found, the type of `x` will be bound in `T`:

$$$stfl.language![217..218]!file

These variable typings are introduced in the environment by lambda abstractions.


#### Lambda abstractions

The type of a lambda abstraction is a function type from the type of the argument to the type of the body.

The type of the argument is explicitly given and can be immediatly used. The type of the body should be calculated, which is done in the predicate. Note that the typing of the body considers the newly introduced variable, by appending it into the typing environment, before passing it to the relation:

$$$stfl.language![232..234]!file

#### Function application

The last syntacic form to type is function application. In order to type an application, both the function and argument are typed in the predicates.
To obtain the type of an application, the codomain of the function type is used. Luckily, a helper function was introduced earlier which calculates exactly this. At last, the argument should be of the expected type, namely the domain of the function, resulting in an extra predicate:

$$$stfl.language![238..240]!file

### Definition of ::


As `::` is essentialy the same as `⊢` with an empty type environment, `::` is defined in terms of `⊢`. The expression argument is passed to `⊢`, together with the empty type environment `{}`:


$$$stfl.language![188..190]!file


#### Typing expressions

With all the rules defined, expressions can be typed. This results in a derivation[^shortenedProof] of why an expression has a certain type:

[^shortenedProof]: For printing, the derivations of `==` relations are omitted.

\begin{lstlisting}[style=terminal]
# 1 + 2 + 3 applied to ::
# Proof weight: 17, proof depth: 5


                  2 : number         3 : number 
                  --- [TNumber]     --- [TNumber]
 1 : number       {} ⊢ 2, Int       {} ⊢ 3, Int
--- [TNumber]     ------------------- [TAddition]
 {} ⊢ 1, Int      {} ⊢ 2 + 3, Int                                     
----------------------------------------- [TPlus]
{} ⊢ 1 + 2 + 3, Int
------------------------------------- [TEmptyCtx]
1 + 2 + 3 :: Int
\end{lstlisting}




\begin{lstlisting}[style=terminal]
# (\ x: Int. x + 1) 41 applied to ::
# Proof weight: 15, proof depth: 6


                           1 : number                        
----------------- [Tx]     ------------ [Tnumber]   
x : Int , {} ⊢ x, Int      x : Int , {} ⊢ 1, Int             
----------------------------------------- [TPlus]                              
x : Int , {} ⊢ x + 1, Int                            41 : number     
----------------------------- [TLambda]              --- [Tnumber]    
{} ⊢ ( \ x : Int . x + 1 ), Int -> Int               {} ⊢ 41, Int 
----------------------------------------------------------- [Tapp]
{} ⊢ ( \ x : Int . x + 1 ) 41, Int
------------------------------------------------------ [TEmptyCtx]
( \ x : Int . x + 1 ) 41 :: Int
\end{lstlisting}


### Overview

These ten natural deduction rules describe the entire typechecker. For reference, they are all stated here together with the definition of the convenience relation `::` :

$$$stfl.language![188..240]!file


### Conclusion

Naturad deduction rules offer a comprehensible and practical way to capture operational semantics. It is no surprise they are widely adopted by the language design community. Automating the evaluation of such rules offers huge benefits, such as catching type errors and immediately getting an implementation from the specification, removing all ambiguities. 

