 
\clearpage

Operations on representations
-----------------------------

In the previous chapter, an efficient and compact representation was introduced for sets of parsetrees - a big step towards multiple usefull algorithms and abstract interpreation of metafunctions.

However, constructing these algorithms requires basic operations to transform these sets. These operations are presented here.

### Addition of sets

Addition is the merging of two set representations. This is implemented by simply taking all elements of both set representations and removing all the duplicate elements. 

Per example, `{"Bool"} + {baseType}` yields `{"Bool", baseType}`. Note that `"Bool"` is embedded within basetype, the refolding operation (defined below) will remove this.


### Unfolding

The first important operation is unfolding a single level of the symbolic representation. This operation is usefull when introspecting the set, e.g. for applying pattern matches, calculating differences, ...

The unfolding of a set representation is done by unfolding each of the parts, parts which could be either a concrete value, a symbolic value or a sequence of those. Following paragraphs detail on how the unfold of such a part is calculated.

#### Unfolding concrete values

The unfold of a concrete value is just the concrete value itself:

	unfold("Bool") = {"Bool"}

#### Unfolding symbolic values

Unfolding a symbolic value boils down to replacing it by its definition. This implies that the definition of each syntactic form should be known; making unfold a context-dependant operation. For simplicity, it is assumed that the syntax definition is passed to the unfold operation.

Some examples of unfolding a symbolic value would be:

	unfold(baseType) = { "Bool", "Int" } 
	unfold(type)	 = {(typeTerm "->" type), typeTerm}

Note the usage of parentheses around `(typeTerm "->" type")`. This groups the sequence together and is needed to prevent ambiguities later on. Such ambiguities might arise in specific syntaxes, such as a syntax containing following definition:

	subtraction == {number "-" subtraction, number}

Unfolding subtraction two times would yield:

	subtraction == { ..., number "-" number "-" number, ... }

This is ambiguous. The expression instance `3 - 2 - 1` could be parsed both as `(3 - 2) - 1` (which equals 0) and as `3 - (2 - 1)` (which equals 2). The syntax definition suggests the latter, as `subtraction` is defined in a right-associative way. To mirror this in the sequence representation, parentheses are needed:

	subtraction == { ..., number "-" (number "-" number), ... }


#### Unfolding sequences

To unfold a sequence, each of the parts is unfolded. Combining the new sets is done by calculating the cartesian product:

	unfold(baseType "->" baseType)
	== unfold(baseType) × unfold("->") × unfold(baseType)
	== {"Bool", "Int"} × {"->"} × {"Bool", "Int"}
	== { "Bool" "->" "Bool"
	   , "Bool" "->" "Int"
	   , "Int" "->" "Bool"
	   , "Int" "->" "Int" }


#### Unfolding set representions

Finally, a set representation is unfolded by unfolding each of the parts and collecting them in a new set:

	unfold({baseType, baseType "->" baseType})
	= unfold(baseType) + unfold(baseType "->" baseType)
	= {"Bool", "Int"} 
          + {"Bool" "->" "Bool"
            , "Bool" "->" "Int"
            , "Int" "->" "Bool"
            , "Int" "->" "Int" }
	= { "Bool"
	  , "Int"
	  , "Bool" "->" "Bool"
	  , "Bool" "->" "Int"
	  , "Int" "->" "Bool"
	  , "Int" "->" "Int" }


#### Directed unfolds

Throughout the text, unfolding of a set is often needed. However, an unfolded set can be big and unwieldy for this printed medium, especially when only a few elements of the set matter. In the examples we will thus only unfold the elements needed at hand and leave the others unchanged, thus using a _directed unfold_. It should be clear from context which elements are unfolded.


### Refolding

Refolding attempts to undo the folding process. While not strictly necessary, it allows for more compact representations throughout the algorithms - increasing speed - and a more compact output - increasing readability.

For example, refolding would change `{"Bool", "Int", "Bool" "->" "Int"}` into `{baseType, "Bool" "->" "Int"}`, but also `{type, typeTerm, "Bool"}` into `{type}`.


Refolding is done in two steps, repeated until no further folds can be made:

- Grouping subsets (e.g. `"Bool"` and `"Int"`) into their symbolic value (`baseType`)
- Filter away values that are included in another symbolic value (e.g. in `{"Bool", type}`, `"Bool"` can be omitted, as it is included in `"type"`)

This is repeated until no further changes are possible on the set. The entire algorithm can be found in \ref{fig:algoRefold}, following paragraphs detail on each step in the main loop.


#### Grouping sets

Grouping tries to replace a part of the set representation by its symbolic representation, resulting in an equivalent set with a smaller representation (line 11 and 12 in the algorithm).

If the set defining a syntactic form is present in a set representation, the definition set can be folded into its symbolic value.

E.g. given the definition `baseType == {"Bool", "Int}`, we can make the following refold as each element of `baseType` is present:

	refold({"Bool", "Int", "Bool" "->" "Int"}) 
		= {baseType, "Bool" "->" "Int"}


#### Grouping sequences

Refolding elements within a sequence is not as straightforward.
Consider following set:

	{ "Bool" "->" "Bool"
	, "Bool" "->" "Int"
	, "Int" "->" "Bool"
	, "Int" "->" "Int" }


This set representation can be refolded, using the following steps:

- First, the sequences are sorted in buckets, where each sequence in the bucket only has a single different element (line 17):
\begin{lstlisting}
["Bool" "->" "Bool", "Bool" "->" "Int"]
["Int" "->" "Bool", "Int" "->" "Int"]
\end{lstlisting}
	
- Then the different element in the sequences are grouped in a smaller set (line 20):
\begin{lstlisting}
"Bool" "->" {"Bool", "Int"}
"Int" "->" {"Bool", "Int"}
\end{lstlisting}

- This smaller _difference set_ is unfold recursively (line 24):
\begin{lstlisting}
"Bool" "->" unfold({"Bool", "Int"}) 
"Int" "->" unfold({"Bool", "Int"})
\end{lstlisting}

- This yields a new set; `{"Bool" "->" baseType, "Int" "->" baseType}`. As the unfolding algorithm tries to reach a fixpoint, it will rerun. This yields a new bucket, on which the steps could be repeated:
\begin{lstlisting}
["Bool" "->" baseType, "Int" "->" baseType]
-> {"Bool", "Int"} "->" baseType
-> unfold({"Bool", "Int"}) "->" baseType
-> baseType "->" baseType
\end{lstlisting}


This yields the expression we unfolded earlier: `baseType "->" baseType`.


#### Filtering out subvalues

The second step in the algorithm is the removal of already represented values.
Consider `{ baseType, "Bool"}`. As the definition of `baseType` includes `"Bool"`, it is unneeded in this representation. 

This can be done straightforward, by comparing each value in the set against each other value and checking whether this is contained in it (line 41 and 42).





\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{lstlisting}[style=algo]
refold(syntax, repr):
    do
	# Save the value to check if we got into a fixpoint
        old_repr = repr;
	
	# Simple, direct refolds
	for (name, definition) in syntax:
	    # The definition set is a subset of the current set
	    # Remove the definition set 
	    # replace it by the symbolic value
	    if definition ⊆ repr:
		repr = repr - definition + {name}

	for sequence in repr:
	    # a bucket is a set of sequences
	    # with exactly one different element
	    buckets = sortOnDifferences(repr)
	    for (bucket, different_element_index) in buckets:
		# extract the differences of the sequence
		different_set = bucket.each(
			get(different_element_index))

		# actually a (possibly smaller) set
		folded = refold(syntax, different_set)

		# Extract the identical parts of the bucket
		(prefix, postfix) = bucket.get(0)
			.split(different_element_index)
		# Create a new set of sequences,
		# based on the smaller folded set
		sequences = prefix × folded × postfix
	
		# remove the old sequences,
		# add the new elements to the set
		repr = repr -  bucket + sequences

	for element in repr:
	    for other_element in repr:
		if element == other_element:
		    continue
		if other_element.embeds(element):
		    repr = repr - element

    while(old_repr != repr)
    return repr
\end{lstlisting}
\caption{The algorithm to refold a set representation}
\label{algoRefold}
\end{figure}



\clearpage


### Resolving to a syntactic form

Given a set, it can be usefull to calculate what syntactic form contains all of the elements of the set.  
E.g., each element from `{"Bool", "(" "Int" ")", "Int"}` is embedded in `typeTerm`.

This can be calculated quite easily:

- First, every sequence is substituded by the syntactic form which created it, its generator. In the earlier example, this would give: 
\begin{lstlisting}
{baseType, typeTerm, baseType}
\end{lstlisting}

- The least common supertype of these syntactic forms gives the syntactic form embedding all. As noted in section \ref{embedded-syntactic-forms}, the supertype relationship of a syntax forms an order. Getting least common supertype thus becomes calculating the meet of these types (`typeTerm`).



### Subtraction of sets

Subtraction of sets enabes a lot of usefull algorithms (such as liveability checks), but is quite complicated to implement. 

The subtraction of a set and a sequence is calculated by subtracting the sequence of each element in the set. This subtraction of a single element might result in no, one or multiple new elements in the set. 
There are a few different cases to consider, depending on what is subtracted from what. We have the following cases, for which the subtraction is presented in its own paragraph, with a small example:

- A concrete value is subtracted from a sequence
- A symbolic value is subtracted from a sequence
- A sequence is subtracted from a symbolic value
- A sequence is subtracted from a sequence

In these paragraphs, the term **subtrahend** refers to the element that is _subtracted_, whereas the **minuand** refers to the element that is _subtracted from_. As mnemonic, the minuand will di\emph{min}ish, whereas the subtrahend _subtracts_.

#### Subtraction of concrete values from a sequence

Subtraction of a concrete value from a concrete sequence only has an effect if the subtrahend and minuend are the same. Subtracting a concrete value from a different concrete value or subtracting it from a sequence has no effect.

Some example subtractions are:

- `"Bool" - "Bool"` is `{}` (thus the empty set)
- `"Int" - "Bool"` is `{"Int"}`
- `("Int" "->" "Int") - "Int"` is `{("Int" "->" "Int")}`

If the minuend is a single symbolic value, the subtraction only has an effect if the subtrahend is embedded within this symbolic value. If that is the case, the symbolic value is unfolded to a new set, from which the subtrahend is subtracted recursively. This can be seen in following examples:

- `baseType - "Bool"` equals `{"Bool", "Int"} - "Bool"`, resulting in `{"Int"}`
- `type - "("` equals `{type}`

#### Subtraction of a symbolic value from a sequence

Subtracting a symbolic value from a sequence could result in the empty set, when the subtrahend (the symbolic set) embeds the minuend:

- `"Bool" - baseType` is `{}`, as `"Bool"` is embedded in `baseType`
- `baseType - baseType` is `{}`, as baseType equals itself
- `"Bool" - type` is `{}` as `"Bool"` is embedded in `type` (via `typeTerm` and `baseType`)
- `baseType - type` is `{}` too, as it is embedded as well
- `("(" type ")") - type` is `{}`, as this is a sequence inside `typeTerm`


If the minuend is a single symbolic value which embeds the subtrahend, the resulting set is smaller than the minuend. Calculating the result is done by unfolding the minuend, from which the subtrahend is subtracted:

- `typeTerm - baseType` becomes `{baseType, "(" type ")"} - baseType`, resulting in `{"(" type ")"}`


#### Subtraction of a sequence from a symbolic value


If the minuend (a symbolic value) embeds the subtrahend (a sequence), then the result of the subtraction can be calculated by unfolding the minuend and then subtracting the subtrahend from each element, as can be seen in the following example: 

	`type - ("(" type ")") 
	= {typeTerm "->" type, typeTerm} - ("(" type ")")
	= {typeTerm "->" type, baseType, "(" type ")"} - ("(" type ")")
	= {typeTerm "->" type, baseType}

If the minuend (a symbolic value) does not embed the subtrahend, then the subtraction has no effect:

- `type - (expr "-" expr)` is `{type}`

#### Subtraction of a sequence from a sequence

The last case is subtracting a sequence from another sequence. As this is rather complicated, we start with an example., we start with an example before giving the algorithmic approach.

##### Example

As all good things in programming, this subtraction relies on recursion; we will follow the example through the call stack.

1. Consider `("(" type ")") - ("(" ("Bool" "->" type) ")")`. It is intuitively clear that the parentheses `"("` and `")"` should remain, and that we want to subtract `type - ("Bool" "->" type)`.

2. Here we subtract a sequence again. We unfold `type`, to yield: [^swap]

	{typeTerm, typeTerm "->" type} - ("Bool" "->" type) 



[^swap]: for practical reasons, I swapped the order of both elements in the text. As this is a set, that doesn't matter.




3. In the set, we now have two values we should subtract:
- `typeTerm - ("Bool" "->" type)` yields `typeTerm`, as neither shadows the other.
- `(typeTerm "->" type) - ("Bool" "->" type)` can be aligned. It is clear we'll want to have `typeTerm - "Bool"` and `type - type` and let `"->"` unchanged.

4. `typeTerm - "Bool"` gives us `{baseType, "(" type ")"} - "Bool"`, resulting in `{"Int", "(" type ")"}`.
It is important to note that `(Bool)` is _still_ an element of this set, despite "Bool" without parentheses is not.
Despite having the same semantics, these are two syntacticly different forms!

5. `type - type` is `{}`.


At this point, we have all the ingredients necessary, and we can put our subtraction back together.

5. The biggest puzzle is how to put `(typeTerm "->" type) - ("Bool" "->" type)` together. 
   Intuitivelly, we'd expect it to be `{"Int" "->" type, "(" type ")" "->" type}`.
   More formally, the directed unfold of   
	 `typeTerm "->" type` is `{ "Bool" "->" type, "Int" "->" type, ("(" type ")") "->" type}`.
   Subtracting `"Bool" "->" type` yields our former result.

6. We put together the results of the recursive calls, being:
	- `{typeTerm}`
	- `{"Int" "->" type, "(" type ")" "->" type}`   
  This results in `{"Int" "->" type, "(" type ")" "->" type, typeTerm}`

7. We unfolded `type` to subtract the sequence, yielding    
	`{"Int" "->" type, "(" type ")" "->" type, typeTerm}`

8. We put the parentheses back around each expression:   
`{"(" ("Int" "->" type) ")", "(" "(" type ")" "->" type ")", "(" typeTerm ")"}`, giving the desired result.

##### Algorithm

So, how do we algorithmically subtract two sequences?

Consider sequence `a b`, where `a` unfolds to `a1, a2, a3, ...` and `b` unfolds to `b1, b2, b3, ...`. This means that `a b` unfolds to `a1 b1, a1 b2, a1 b3, ... , a2 b1, a2 b2, ...`

Now, if we would subtract sequence `a1 b1` from this set, only a single value would be gone, the result would nearly be the original cartesian product.

To do this, we first calculate the pointwise differences between the sequences. We align both sequences[^sameLength] and calculate the difference:


	a - a1= a - a1 = {a2, ...}
	b - b1 = {b2, ...}

[^sameLength]: This implies both sequences have the same length. If these don't have the same length, just return the original sequence as the subtraction does not make sense anyway.


Now, the resulting sequences are `{(a - a1) b, a (b - b1)}`.

Generalized to sequences from aribitrary length, we replace each element of the sequence once with the pointwise difference:

	a b c d ... - a1 b1 c1 d1  ...
	= { (a - a1) b c d ...
	  , a (b - b1) c d ...
	  , a b (c - c1) d ...
	  , a b c (d - d1) ...
	  } 

We apply this on the example `(typeTerm "->" type) - ("Bool" "->" type)`, yielding following pointwise differences:

	typeTerm - "Bool" = {"Int", "(" type ")"}
	"->" - "->"	  = {}
	type - type	  = {}

Resulting in:

	  { (typeTerm - "Bool") "->" type
	  , typeTerm ("->" - "->") type
	  , typeTerm "->" (type - type)}
	= {{"Int", "(" type ")"} "->" type
	  , typeTerm {} type
	  , typeTerm "->" {}}
	= {{"Int", "(" type ")"} "->" type}
	= {"Int" "->" type, ("(" type ")") "->" type}


