
 Lifting metafunctions to work over sets 
------------------------------------------

In this chapter, the metafunctions are actually lifted to metafunctions over sets, using abstract interpretation. These metafunctions over sets will play a crucial role in later algorithms and the gradualization of programming languages.
 
The abstract interpretation framework, introduced in chapter \ref{abstract-interpretation} will guide the interpretation of patterns and expressions, the building blocks used to define functions; the set representation and operations introduced in the previous two chapters are used as data structure to make the computation feasible.


### Translating metafunctions to the abstract domain

Metafunctions normally operate on parsetrees, which are elements of the concrete domain. In order to lift them to the abstract domain, sets of parsetrees, functions α (abstraction) and γ (concretization) are needed.

The abstraction-function is straightforward, as the smallest set representing a parsetree is the set containing only that parsetree.

Translating a set representation back to the concrete domain is done by enumerating all the elements represented in the set. The set representation, which possibly contains symbolic values, should thus be unfolded iteratively until only concrete values remain, reaching fixpoint for the unfold operation. The definitions of the abstraction and concretization functions can be found in figure \ref{fig:defAlphaGamma}.

\begin{figure}[h!]
\[
\begin{array}{rcl}
\alpha(\code{v}) & = & \code{\{v\}} \\
\gamma(w) & = & unfold^*(w) \\
\end{array}
\]
\caption{Definition of abstraction ($\alpha$) and concretization ($\gamma$)}
\label{fig:defAlphaGamma}
\end{figure}


This repeated unfolding of concretization is often impossible: a recursive definition (such as `type ::= baseType "->" type`) will result in an infinite set. The concretization function is only to study the properties of the abstract interpretation, but not for an actual implementation. 


#### Monotonicity and Soundness

As seen in section \ref{properties-of-ux3b1-and-ux3b3}, the functions α and γ should work in tandem to form a Galois-connection. If these functions would not form a Galois connection, the translations would mismatch and the approach breaks: the abstract computation might predict impossible computations.

The given functions do form a Galois-connection, as they fullfill monotonicity and soundness:

\begin{lemma}
α (over sets) is monotone: \\

\[ \begin{array}{rcll}
X \subseteq Y & \Rightarrow & \alpha(X) \subseteq \alpha(Y) & \\
& \Rightarrow & X \subseteq Y & \text{(As α(X) = X)} \\
\end{array}
 \]
\end{lemma}

\begin{lemma}
γ is monotone: \\

\[ \begin{array}{rcll}
X \subseteq Y & \Rightarrow & \gamma(X) \subseteq \gamma(Y) \\
& \Rightarrow & unfold^*(X) \subseteq unfold^*(Y) & \text{(Unfold does not change the contents of the represented set)} \\
& \Rightarrow & X \subseteq Y \\
\end{array}
 \]
\end{lemma}


\begin{lemma} α and γ are sound:
\[ \begin{array}{rll}
 &n \in \gamma(\alpha(n)) \\
= & n \in \gamma(\{n\}) & \text{(Definition of α)} \\
= & n \in unfold^*\{n\} & \text{(\emph{n} is a concrete value, thus can not be unfolded)} \\
= & n \in \{n\} \\
\end{array}
\]
and
\[ \begin{array}{rll}
 & M \subseteq \alpha(\gamma(M)) & \text{(α over a set returns that set)}\\
= & M \subseteq \gamma(M) & \text{(definition of γ)}\\
= & M \subseteq unfold^*(M) & \text{(Unfolding a set representation has no influence on the represented set)}\\
= & M \subseteq M \\
\end{array}
\]
\end{lemma}


This implies that the set representation can actually be used as abstract domain for metafunctions.


### Calculating a possible pattern match


Pattern matching can be interpreted in the domain of sets too - an important step in lifting metafunctions to the abstract domain. As pattern matching against a given pattern can be seen as a function from a parsetree to a variable store, the framework of abstract interpretation can be used to deduce the behaviour of pattern matching over sets.

There are three kinds of patterns that are considered:

- A pattern assigning to a variable
- A pattern comparing to a concrete value
- A pattern deconstructing the parse tree


In the following paragraphs, the behaviour of each of these patterns is explored. The symbol `~` is used to denote the pattern matching function, which takes a pattern and a parsetree to construct a variable store. Variable stores in the concrete domain will be denoted either `{Variable --> Parsetree}`, whereas variable stores in the abstract domain are denoted `{Variable --> {a, b, c}}` or `{Variable --> SomeSet}`.

As a variable store can be seen as a function from the variable name to the value, abstraction and concretization can be freely applied on the store, where $\alpha(\{ \varstore{Var --> a}, \varstore{Var --> b} \}) = \varstore{Var --> α{a, b}}$.

The second aspect of pattern matching is the aspect that a match can _fail_. This is modeled by, apart from the variable store, returning a set which _might_ match. This function is denoted by `expr ~? Set`




#### Variable assignment

The first pattern to consider is variable assignment:

	Var ~ Set

As each value in the set could be assigned in some concrete computation, the intuition for the abstract computation is that the entire set is assigned to the variable. This intuition is correct and can be formalized with the general formula of abstract interpretation, namely `α(map(f, γ(set)))`, where `f` is the pattern match against `Var`:

$$
\begin{array}{cl}
  & \alpha(map(~Var, \gamma(Set))) \\
= & \alpha(map(~Var, unfold^*(Set))) \\
= & \alpha(map(~Var, { ..., a, b, c, ...} )) \\
= & \alpha({..., \varstore{Var --> a}, \varstore{Var --> b}}, \varstore{Var --> c}, ...\}) \\
= & \varstore{Var --> {..., a, b, c, ...}} \\
= & \varstore{Var --> Set} \\
\end{array} 
$$

Assignment to a variable can never fail, so the matching set is exactly the input set: `Var ~? Set = Set`.

The behaviour of the pattern store when the variable `Var` is matched twice is handled by the deconstruction pattern, as it is the responsibility of the deconstruction to merge multiple variable stores.




#### Concrete value

The second pattern is matching against a literal:

	"Literal" ~ Set

This pattern does not add variables to the store, but only checks if the match might hold, returning an empty store for the match or failing if the concrete literal is not the same.

The behaviour over sets is thus mainly driven by the question of `"Literal"` is an element of the set or not:

$$ \begin{array}{cl}
  & \alpha(map(~\code{"Literal"}, \gamma(Set))) \\
= & \alpha(map(~\code{"Literal"}, unfold^*(Set))) \\
= & \begin{cases} 
\alpha(map(~\code{"Literal"}, \{ ..., a, b, c, \code{"Literal"} ...\})) & \text{\code{"Literal"} is member of the set} \\
\alpha(map(~\code{"Literal"}, \{ ..., a, b, c, ... \})) & \text{\code{"Literal"} is not member of the set} \\
\end{cases} \\
= & \begin{cases} 
\alpha(\{ ..., FAIL, FAIL, FAIL, \{\} ...\})) & \text{\code{"Literal"} is member of the set} \\
\alpha(\{ ..., FAIL, FAIL, FAIL, ... \})) & \text{\code{"Literal"} is not member of the set} \\
\end{cases} \\
= & \begin{cases} 
\{\} & \text{\code{"Literal"} is member of the set} \\
FAIL & \text{\code{"Literal"} is not member of the set} \\
\end{cases} \\
\end{array} 
$$

In other words, pattern matching a set is possible if this literal is an element of the set. If not, the match fails. The matching set is thus: `"Literal" ~? Set = {"Literal"} ∩ Set` 

#### Deconstructing pattern

The last fundamental pattern is a sequence deconstructing a parsetree:

	x y ~ Set

The first aspect is whether the sequence might match. Intuitively, only sets containing an instance of the sequence could match the deconstruction. As each element of the deconstruction could be a subpattern, not every instance of the sequence will match, but only the instances having the right subparts. Luckily, the instances matching is exactly the cartesian product of the matching subparts.



$$
\begin{array}{cl}
 & \alpha(map(\code{~?} x y, \gamma(Set))) \\
= & \alpha(map(\code{~?}x y, \{..., x' \times y', b, c, ...\})) \\
= & \alpha(\{..., x y \code{~?} x1 y1, x y \code{~?} x1 y2, x y \code{~?} x2 y1, ... , x y \code{~?} b, x y \code{~?} c, ... \}) \\
= & \alpha(\{..., x y \code{~?} x1 y2, x y \code{~?} x1 y2, x y \code{~?} x2 y1, ... ,  FAIL, FAIL, ... \}) \\
= & \alpha(\{..., (x \code{~?} x1 \times y \code{~?} y1), (x \code{~?} x1 \times y \code{~?} y2), (x \code{~?} x2 \times y \code{~?} y1), ... \}) \\
= & \alpha((x \code{~?} x1 + x \code{~?} x2 + ...) \times (y \code{~?} y1 + y \code{~?} y2 + ...)) \\
= & (x \code{~?} x') \times (y \code{~?} y') \\
\end{array}
$$

This suggests a very practical algorithm for abstract pattern matching:

- As sequences are supposed to be unique (section \ref{uniqueness-of-sequences}), this implies that only a single subset should be considered. 
- For these sequences, pattern match the parts and combine their results


The store generated by the deconstructing pattern is the sum of all the stores. In the case that a single variable that is declared on multiple places. In the concrete domain, the merge of the variable store checks that the value is the same in both stores, failing otherwise. This implies that, in the abstract domain, it should be possible that both contain the same value; in other words, there should be a common subset which the variable might be.

$$
\begin{array}{cl}
 & merge(\varstore{T --> Set1}, \varstore{T --> Set2}) \\
= & \varstore{T --> Set1 ∩ Set2}
\end{array} 
$$

If the intersection is empty, this means that no concrete values could ever match this pattern, indicitating a dead clause. This also indicates that the earlier calculation of the matchin set (`x ~ x' × y ~ y'`) is too simplistic, but working out the full details would lead to far. A simpler way to calculate the matching set is to use the resulting variable store, and backfill the pattern as if it was an expression; this is introduced in the next section.

#### Multiple arguments

Functions with multiple arguments can be handled just as sequences are. Consider a function taking two arguments `f : a -> b -> c`. The two arguments can be considered a new syntactic form, `arg0 ::= a b`, underpinning the our intuition.

In other words, all functions can be considered functions with one input argument and one output argument.


### Calculating possible return values of an expression


Given a set a variable might be, the set representation of a function can easily be calculated.
As function expressions are sequences with either concrete values or variables, the translation to a representation is quickly made:

- A concrete value, e.g. `"Bool"` is represented by itself: `{"Bool"}`
- A variable is represented by the types it might assume. E.g. if `T1` can be `{"(" type ")", "Bool"}`, we use this set in the expression
- A function call is replaced by the syntactic form it might return. Typically, the signature is used to deduce this the return type, but some algorithms use more accurate set representations 
-  The set produced by a sequence is the cartesian product of the parts.

This gives us all the tools needed to lift single-clause functions to functions over sets.

### Combining clauses

Combining multiple clauses is the last step in lifting arbitrary functions to functions over sets.

For each clause, the output of that clause can be calculated if the input set for that clause is known. The trick lies in the calculation of what each clause might get as input. Given the input set `I` for the function, the first clause will receive this entire input and matches a subset `I1` of the input. The second clause will receive the nonmatching part, thus `I - I1`, again matching a subset. This way, the input for each clause can be calculation, together with the subset of the input _not_ matching any clause of the function, giving the **totality check** for free. Furhtermore, if a single clause never matches any input, a **dead clause** is detected, giving another check for free.

	f	: a -> b
	# Input I
	f(x:x)	= ...	# Matches I1
	# Input I - I1
	f(y:y)	= ...
	# Input I - I2
	...
	# I - In is fallthrough and will never match



This gives all the pieces needed to lift functions over parsetrees into functions over sets, in a practical and computable way. 

Per example, if one would like to know the result of the domain function over the set `{"Bool", "Bool" "->" type, ("Int") "->" "Bool"}`, this can be calculated. As reminder, the definition of `domain` can be found in figure \ref{fig:domainDefRefresher}). The actual calculation of the function happens clause per clause:

- Clause 1 matches nothing of the set, no element of the set has parentheses
- Clause 2 matches `("Int") "->" "Bool"`, returning `"Int"`, leaving `{"Bool", "Bool" "->" type}` for the next clause
- Clause 3 matches `"Bool" "->" type`, returning "Bool"
- `"Bool"` is never matched and falls through, giving no result

The sum of the calculation is `{"Bool", "Int"}` which can be refolded to `{baseType}'`.

\begin{figure}[h!]
$$$stfl.language![65..68]!file
\caption{Definition of the domain function, as introduced in chapter \ref{domain-and-codomain}.}
\label{fig:domainDefRefresher}
\end{figure}



