
 Gradualizing the typesystem manually
--------------------------------------

### Determining the scope of the unknown type information

The first aspect of gradualization, is choosing how broad unknown type information is. The gradual type system might allow `?` to represent any type (such as `"Bool"`, `"Int"` or a function type such as `"Bool -> Int"`). Another choice could be that `?` only represent concrete data, thus that `?` can only represent `"Bool"` or `"Int"`. This is something the language designer chooses in function of the goal of the language.

For the remainder of the text, the scope of unknown type information is every possible type. This is denoted with $scope(\code{?}) = \{\code{type}\}$.


### Representing dynamic types

The first aspect of gradualizing a programming language is allowing the typesystem to deal with missing type information.

Of course, the lack of typeinformation should be represented in the language itself. This lack of type information will be represented with the type `?` which will act as a new basetype in the language. As such, the syntax is amended:

	baseType	::= "Bool" | "Int" | "?"

No other changes regarding the types are needed. The programmer might choose to represent type errors explicitly, using a new syntactic form. This issue is handled in the section about the runtime.

%% TODO Link

### Gradualing the typing relationship

Gradualizing the typesystem boils down to ensuring that the typing rules can handle the missing type information.

When a closer look is taken to the rules, two categories are found:

- Rules deriving type information from a value without comparison, such as `[TNumber]`, `[TBool]`, `[Tparens]` or `[Tx]`. The first two rules will never encounter unknown type variables; the latter two rules might receive `?` as type of the subexpression, but pass it along without inspecting it. These rules can be left unchanged.
- Rules comparing types to other rules, which is always done using the relation `==`. Some special care should be given when an operand uses a function, as can be seen in the rule `[Tapp]`, where `dom(T1)` is compared to `dom(T2)`.


This notion of type equality, inherently driven by the function `equate`, should be modified in order to gradualize the typechecker. Intuitively, seen the optimistic nature of gradual typecheckers, equality should pass if one of the parameters is the unknown type, or check recursively if the type passed is a function type. This gives rise to the _consistency_ relationship as described in \cite{GradualTypingSiek}.

The function `equate` is renamed to `isConsistent` and changed to:

	isConsistent		: type -> type -> type
	isConsistent(T, T)	= T
	isConsistent(?, T)	= T
	isConsistent(T, ?)	= T
	isConsistent(Ta1 "->" Ta2, Tb1 "->" Tb2)
				= isConsistent(Ta1, Tb1) "->" isConsistent(Ta2, Tb2)

Analogously, we rename `==` into `~`, a purely cosmetic change to reflect the change of meaning, given a new natural deduction rule:


	 isConsistent(T1, T2)
	--------------------- [ConsBase]
	       T1 ~ T2


At last, the two functions `dom` and `cod` should be gradualized; they should be able to handle the unknown type.
Remember that the unknown type might represent either any other type, such as `"Bool"`, `"Int"`, `"Bool -> Int"`, `"Int" -> "Int"`, ...
The result of `dom("?")` would thus be some grouping of `dom("Bool")`, `dom("Int")`, `dom("Bool -> Int")`, `dom("Int" -> "Int")`, ... 
The first two function calls, `dom("Bool")`, `dom("Int")`, are not defined and are thus irrelevant. The latter two, `dom("Bool -> Int")`, `dom("Int" -> "Int")`, return `"Bool"` and `"Int"` respectively. Broadly speaking, the domain of a function type could be every possible type - including a function type as well. This is what `dom("?")` should return: _every possible type_. Luckily, there exist a typeterm expressing exactly that within our gradual language: the unknown type `"?"`. The domain function (and analogously codomain function) can thus be gradualized by adding a single extra clause:

	dom	: type -> type
	dom("(" T1 ")")		  = T1
	dom(("(" T1 ")") "->" T2) = T1
	dom(T1 "->" T2) 	  = T1
	dom("?")		  = "?"

This approach has been formalized in the AGT-paper by Garcia et al.\cite{GarciaAGT}, and will be used in the next section, in which the typesystem is gradualized in a more automated manner. The gradual typesystem can be found in \ref{fig:statTypRecap}.



\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}


 n:number
---------------		[Tnumber] 
 Γ ⊢ n, "Int"


 b:bool
----------------	[Tbool]
 Γ ⊢ b, "Bool"



--------------------	[Tx]
 Γ[ x ":" T ] ⊢ x, T



 Γ ⊢ e, T
-------------------	[TParens]
 Γ ⊢ "(" e ")", T


 Γ ⊢ e, T'	T' ~ T
----------------------- [TAscr]
 Γ ⊢ e "::" T, T'




 Γ ⊢ n1, Int1	Γ ⊢ n2, Int2	Int1 ~ "Int"	Int2 ~ "Int"
-------------------------------------------------------------- [TPlus]
 Γ ⊢ n1 "+" n2, "Int"


 Γ ⊢ c, TCond	TCond ~ "Bool"		Γ ⊢ e1, T0	Γ ⊢ e2, T1	T0 ~ T1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------	[TIf]
 Γ ⊢ "If" c "Then" e1 "Else" e2, T0



 ((x ":" T1) "," Γ) ⊢ e, T2
-------------------------------------------------------	[TLambda]
 Γ ⊢ "(" "\\" x ":" T1 "." e ")", T1 "->" T2



 Γ ⊢ e1, Tfunc	Γ ⊢ e2, Targ	Targ ~ dom(Tfunc)
---------------------------------------------------	[Tapp]
 Γ ⊢ e1 e2, cod(Tfunc)



 consistency(T1, T2)
---------------- [Eq]
 T1 ~ T2


\end{lstlisting}
\caption{The gradualized typesystem for STFL}
\label{fig:statTypRecap}
\end{figure}


 The dynamic runtime
---------------------

As earlier noted, the runtime itself should support dynamic features.

The first feature is the behaviour when a type error is encountered. This could be explicitly coded as an extra syntactic form, allowing the error to be handled from within the programming language itself. The language designer might leave type errors implicit as well, as the ALGT-tool will print an error message when the reduction of the expression can not continue - due to a type error. This latter approach, of implicit type errors, is taken in this dissertation to keep the examples clean and simple.

The second feature that the runtime should factor is that types might be the unknown type. There are two rules in the dynamic runtime which explicitly deal with types: `[EvalAscr]` and `[EvalLamApp]`.

The rule `[EvalAscr]` performs a runtime typecheck; an expression of the form `e "::" T` is reduced to `e`, iff `e` is of type `T`. Guided by the optimism of the gradual approach, a cast to the unknown type should always pass; `e :: ?` should thus be equivalent to `e`. Analogously, if the type of `e` can not be derived and turns out to be the unknown type, then the assertion should pass as well. Just as with the typechecker, it suffices to replace `T0 == T` with `T0 ~ T`, where T0 is the derived type of `e` and `T` the expected type. Type errors are still detected; if the expected type would be `"Bool"`, but the typing of `e` would yield `"Int"`, then the consistency relationship would be undefined, blocking progress and resulting in a unreducible expression. This unreducible expression will trigger an error message.

The rule `[EvalLamApp]` applies lambda abstractions, by substituting the argument in the function body. Before application, the natural deduction rule checks that the argument is canonical (`arg:value`), checks type of the argument (`arg::TArg`) and compares this against the expected type (`TArg == TExp`).
This check is important, as it enables an important property of gradual typing: _type errors can not occur in statically typed parts of the program_.
Without this check, an argument with the wrong type might get in the function body, creating havoc in a place it is not expected.

The type comparison should still be gradualized, for which a few cases can be distinguished:

 - The expected type is dynamic, in which case the runtime check is useless.
 - The expected type is given and the argument is a simple value. The strict semantics will force the argument to be fully evaluated before the typecheck is performed, thus the type will be easily computable.
- The expected type is given and the argument is a lambda abstraction. If the full type of the lambda expression is known, the type comparsion should pickup type inconsistencies. If the type of this lambda expression contains some unknowns, type errors can not happen by simply calling this lambda abstraction, guaranteeing the type safety within the typed parts.

In all these cases, the optimistic consistency relation can be used to compare the types with each other.

The changes to the runtime system could thus be summarized as replacing the operator `==` with the consistency operator `~`. The adjusted typing rules can be found in \ref{fig:dynRuntime}.


\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}
 e0 → e1
-----------------			[EvalCtx]
 e[e0] → e[e1]



 n1:Number	n2:Number
------------------------------------	[EvalPlus]
 n1 "+" n2 → !plus(n1, n2)



 e :: T0	T ~ T0
------------------------		[EvalAscr]
 e "::" T → e


----------------			[EvalParens]
 "(" e ")" → e


---------------------------------------		[EvalIfTrue]
 "If" "True" "Then" e1 "Else" e2 → e1


----------------------------------------	[EvalIfFalse]
 "If" "False" "Then" e1 "Else" e2 → e2


 arg:canon	arg :: TArg	TArg ~ TExp	
----------------------------------------------- [EvalLamApp]
 ("(" "\\" var ":" TExp "." e ")") arg → !subs:e(var, arg, e)
\end{lstlisting}

\caption{The dynamic runtime, which can handle gradual types}
\label{fig:dynRuntime}
\end{figure}




