
\clearpage

 Automating gradualization
---------------------------

The gradualization, as given above, boils down to a few changes

- Adding the unknown type `"?"` to the syntax.
- Renaming some functions and relations to indicate their new meaning.
- Ensuring all functions handling types can deal with the unknown type.

The first two are but refactorings, which can be fully automated with ALGT: a file format exists to refactor elements of a language, which can be applied to the original language yielding the gradualized language.

Making sure that each function can handle the unknown type is automated as well by the ALGT-tool. Using the abstract interpretation framework and algorithms as introduced in chapter \ref{syntax-driven-abstract-interpretation}, the behaviour of a function over the unknown type can be calculated.


### Refactoring

The differences between STFL and GTFL can be denoted into a `.langauge-changes` file. When both the original language and changes are passed into ALGT, the changes described in the changes-file are executed, which results in the gradual variant.

For each aspect of the original language definition (such as `Syntax`, `Functions`, `Relations`, ...), a section depicting _new_ entities or a section giving `Changes` can be added to the language file.

The erlier changes to the syntax and renamings can be stated easily, as can be seen in figure \ref{fig:gradChanges}.


\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}
 Gradualized
************* 

 Syntax Changes
================

typeTerm 	::= ... | "?"

Rename type to gtype
Rename typeTerm to gtypeTerm

 Function Changes
==================

Rename equate to isConsistent

# Actual function chagnes are added in the next section

 Relation Changes
==================

Rename (==) to (~), pronounced as "is consistent"
\end{lstlisting}
\caption{The simple changes to STFL, denoting the addition of the unknown type and renaming changed entities to reflect their new meaning.}
\label{fig:gradChanges}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

### Gradualizing domain and codomain

The unknown type `"?"` is a strange element within the typesystem, as the unknown type `"?"` represents _a set of types_. The unknown type is thus of a fundamental different nature in comparison with the normal types.
As the unknown type behaves as a set of types, the behaviour of a function over `"?"` should behave the same as the abstract interpretation over the set that the unknown type represents, as noted in the paper by Garcia et al. \cite{GarciaAGT}.

Exactly these abstract functions over sets are available in ALGT, using the abstract interpretation framework that was introduced earlier. Using the flags `--ifa dom --iaa (t:type)`, the tool will perform an analysis of the `dom` function over the set of all types, giving an implementation of the gradual counterpart of `dom`.
 The result, as can be seen in figure \ref{fig:domAnalysis}, gives us, again `type`. This indicates what the gradual counterpart of `dom` should return when presented `"?"`: it returns `"?"`. The extra clause `dom("?")	= "?"` is thus needed in the gradualization-file.

For the codomain function `cod`, the same procedure can be followed, obtaining the analogous result that `cod("?") = "?"`.

If we would choose `"?"` to only represent `{"Bool", "Int"}`, invoking ALGT with `--ifa dom --iaa (t:type)` tells us, as can be seen in figure \ref{fig:domAnalysisBaseTypes}, that no output is possible at all, indicating that `dom("?")` is not defined in this scenario.

\begin{figure}
$$$[$$$stfl.language --ifa dom --iaa (t:type) --nc]![67..]
\caption{Part of the analysis of function \code{dom}, which gives the possible outcomes for $\code{dom}(\{\code{t:type}\})$. The full analysis output can be found in the appendixes.}
\label{fig:domAnalysis}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}
$$$[$$$stfl.language --ifa dom --iaa (t:baseType) --nc]![62..]
\caption{Part of the analysis of function \code{dom}, which gives the possible outcomes for $\code{dom}(\{\code{baseType}\})$}
\label{fig:domAnalysisBaseTypes}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

### Gradualizing equate

As `equate` has two arguments, reverse engineering the behaviour of the gradual counterpart of `equate` is not as easy, but ALGT can help this process too.

For starters, if one of the arguments is the unkown type, the behaviour of equate can be tested by passing the abstract arguments `(t:type),...`, where `...` is the other argument for which the behaviour is needed. For example, the abstract arguments `(t:type),"Bool"` would yield `"Bool"`. But rather then knowing the behaviour of `equate("?", "Bool")`, the behaviour of `equate("?", someType)` is needed for the gradualization. Luckily, the analysis of `equate` contains some more usefull information. As can be seen in figure \ref{fig:equateAnalysis}, the detailed analysis of clause 0 hints that, if clause 0 matches, that its output would strictly equal one of the input arguments.
The result of `equate("?", t)` should thus equal `t` (and by the symmetry of the arguments, `equate(t, "?") = t`).


At last, we must deduce how the function behaves when the unkown type would occur somewhere as part of the first argument. ALGT can give a hint here too, by performing the abstract interpretation with arguments `t "->" t, t`. The analysis, as can be seen in \ref{fig:equateAnalysisFuncTypes}, gives away that the result will have the form of a function type, but only if the second argument is a function type as well, and iff both the domain and codomain of both arguments are the same, indicating another missing clause: `equate(Ta1 "->" Ta2, Tb1 "->" Tb2) = equate(Ta1, Tb1) "->" equate(Ta2, Tb2)`.

The unkown type can not hide at other places, as indicated by the declaration of the syntactic form of `type`, so no other cases should be investigated.


\begin{figure}
$$$[$$$stfl.language --ifa equate --iaa t,t --nc]
\caption{The full analysis of \code{equate}, with abstract arguments \code{type,type}}
\label{fig:equateAnalysis}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}[style=terminal]
 Analysis of equate : type -> type -> type 
===========================================
    
     Analysis of clause 0 
    ......................
    
    Clause: 
      equate(T, T)             = T
    
    Possible inputs at this point: 
    #  ((typeTerm "->" type), type)
    
    
    Possible results: 
      (typeTerm(arg0:0) "->" type(arg0:2)): type/0
    , (typeTerm(arg0:0) "->" type(arg0:2)): type/0	
	--> (typeTerm(arg0:0) "->" type(arg0:2)): type/0 : "type"
    
\end{lstlisting}
\caption{The relevant parts of the analysis of \code{equate}, with abstract arguments \code{type "->" type,type}}
\label{fig:equateAnalysisFuncTypes}
\end{figure}

\clearpage

### Clause additions

To sum up, some clauses should be added to the functions; this can be done with the following statements in the `.language-changes`:

$$$GradualizeSTFL.language-changes![15..33]!file


Conclusion
----------

Using ALGT, gradualizing programming languages is simplified, as an implementation of the gradual function is availbe to experiment with. Converting the implementation to a succint and correct function declaration within ALGT still has to be done manually, requiring some intuition of the programer.



