## Metafunctions

Just as the syntax, the metafunctions are explicitly represented within ALGT. Remember that all metafunctions operate on a parsetree -a part of the target program. The representation of functions is thus closely linked with these parsetrees, but yet straightforward:

- The `Function` data structure contains the body of the function -multiple `Clause`s- and the type of the function (the types of the arguments and the type it'll return). These types are given explicitly in the source code, thus no inference is needed.
- A `Clause` contains the `Expression` returned and zero or more expressions which will performing the pattern matches. 
- An `Expression` acts both as the pattern match representation and as the expression constructing a new parsetree as result of the function. 


For each usage of an `Expression` (as detailed in section \ref{metafunctions}), an element is declared in the algebraic data type `Expression`:

- `MVar` is used to represent metavariables.
- `MParseTree` is used when a literal piece of target program is needed.
- `MCall` is a call to another function in scope.
- `MSeq` is a node in the meta-expression, grouping multiple parts to a bigger expression. 
- `MAscription` will coerce the embedded expression to be of the given type.
- `MEvalContext` will, when used as pattern, create a hole within `Name` of the form `Expression`. When `MEvalContext` is used to construct a parsetree, it will plug the hole with the embedded expression.

Each `Expression` carries a `TypeName` as first argument, indicating the type of the expression. These types are inferred once the file is parsed.

\begin{lstlisting}

-- A single pattern or expression
data Expression
	= -- a variable
	  MVar TypeName Name				
	  -- a 'value'
	| MParseTree TypeName ParseTree				
	  -- function call; not allowed in pattern matching
	| MCall TypeName Name Builtin [Expression]	
	  -- A node, containing multiple expressions
	| MSeq MInfo [Expression]			
	  -- checks wether the expression is built by this smaller type.
	| MAscription TypeName Expression 		
	  -- describes a pattern that searches a context
	| MEvalContext TypeName Name Expression	

-- A single clause of the function body
data Clause
	= MClause [Expression] Expression

-- A full function
data Function
	= Function [TypeName] TypeName [MClause]


\end{lstlisting}


### Typechecker of expressions

All expressions and patterns are typechecked, as type errors are easily made. Forcing parsetrees to be well-formed prevents the creation of strings which are not part of the language, what would result in hard to track bugs later on. Here, an overview of the inner workings of this typechecker (or more precisely _type annotator) are given. The pseudocode annotating expressions can be found in \ref{fig:typecheckerAlgo}

These internals are simplified, as a type expection is always available: expressions and patterns are always typed explicitly, as the type signature of the function always gives a hint of what syntactic form[^syntacticType] a pattern or expresion is. A type for a pattern indicates what type the pattern should deconstruct, or analogously for expressions, what syntactic form a parsetree would be if the expression was used to construct one.
The natural deduction rules, which will be introduced in the following part, have the same typing available and can thus be typechecked with the same algorithm.  


As expressions and patterns are **duals** in function of semantics, but the same in syntax and internal representation, the same typechecking algorithm can be used for patterns and expressions. However, some fundamental differences exist between in usage between patterns and expressions. The most striking example are variables: in a pattern context, an unknown variable occurence is a declaration; in an expression context, an unknown variable is an error
In order to keep the typechecker uniform, the typechecker merely **annotates** types to each part of the expression; checks for unknown variables are done afterwards by walking the expression again.  

To type **function calls**, a store γ containing all function signatures is provided. This dictionary γ is built before any typechecking happens by assuming the given function signatures are correct. A store for variables is not necessary, as variable typings are compared after the actual type annotation of expressions: a variable table is constructed, in which conflicts can be easily spotted.  

With these prelimaniries, we present the actual typechecking algorithm used in ALGT. The algorithm has a number of cases, depending on the kind of expression that should be typed; composite expressions are handled by recursively typing the parts before handling the whole.



#### Variables

Variables are simply annotated with the expected type. One special case is when two (or more) patterns assign the same variable, such as the clause `f(x, x) = ...`. This is perfectly valid ALGT, as this clause will match when both arguments are identical. With the type signature `f : a -> b -> c` given, type of `x` can be deduced even more accuratly: the biggest common subtype of `a` and `b`, as `x` should be both an `a` and a `b`.

Actual type errors are checked after the initial step of type annotation, when all typing information is already available and inconsistencies can be easily detected.

To catch these inconsistencies between assignement and usage, the following strategy is used:

- First, pattern assignments are calculated; this is done by walking each pattern individually, noting which variables are assigned what types.
- When these individual pattern assignments are known, they are merged. Merging consists of building a bigger dictionary, containing all assigments. If two patterns assign the same variable, compatibility of the types is checked by taking the intersection of both types. If that intersection exists (a single common subtype), then some parsetrees exists which might match the pattern and this common subtype is taken as the type of the variable. If no such subtype exists, a type error is generated.
- With this store of all variable typings at hand, the expression can be checked for _undeclared_ variables. This is simply done by getting the assignments of the expression -the same operation as on patterns- and checking that each variable of the expression occurs in the assigment of the patterns. If not, an unknown variable error is issued.
- The last step checks for inconsistencies between declaration and usage, which checks that a variable always fits its use, thus that no variable isused where a smaller type is expected.

The merging algorithm is listed in figure \ref{fig:mergingAlgo}.

For example, the first clause of `f` (as seen in figure \ref{fig:faultyFunc}) has the typing assignemnts $\{ "x" \rightarrow \{\code{bool}, \code{int} \}\}$. As no intersection exists between `bool` and `int`, an error message is given.


\begin{figure}[h]
\centering
\begin{lstlisting}
not	: bool -> bool
not("True")	= "False"
not("False")	= "True"

f		: int -> bool -> ...
f(x, x)		= ...
\end{lstlisting}


\caption{Example of conflicting variable usage: \code{x} is used both as \code{bool} and \code{int}. }
\label{fig:faultyFunc}
\end{figure}






#### Sequences and string literals

As all expression have an explicit type expectation, typechecking expressions becomes easier. The possible sequences are gathered from the syntax definition and are aligned against the sequence to be typechecked. Then, each element is compared independantly: literals as given in the syntax definition should occor at the same position in the sequence, non-terminals should match the respective subexpressions, as can be seen in figure \ref{fig:typingSeq}.



\begin{figure}[h]
\center
\begin{tabular}{ccc|r}

\code{"1"} & \code{"+"} & \code{x} & Should be typed as \code{expr} \\
\hline
\code{eL} & \code{"+"} & \code{e} \\
\code{eL} & \code{"::"} & \code{type} & Literals don't match \\
\code{eL} & \code{e} & & Not enough elements\\
\code{eL} & & & Not enough elements\\
\end{tabular}

\caption{An example sequence and possible typings}
\label{fig:typingSeq}
\end{figure}

#### Functions

Functions are typed using the store containing all the function signatures. As all functions are explicitly typed, it is already available.

First, all the arguments are typed individually; then the return type of the function is compared against the expected type of the pattern/expression. The comparison used is, again, subtyping, as this always gives a sound result:

- When the funcions is used in an expression, a smaller type will fit nicely in the parsetree.
- When used as an pattern, the function is calculated and compared against the input parsetree. Here, the only requirement is that there exist _some_ parsetrees that are common to the argument type and the result type. In this case, the only check should be that some intersection of both types exists. As $expected type <: funtion type$ gaurantees this, it is a sufficient condition. While this check is a little _to_ strict, it is sufficient for practical use.


#### Type annotations

Type annotations are used for two means. First, it allows easy capturing of syntactic forms (e.g. `isBool((_:bool)) = "True"`). Secondly, they allow disambiguation of definitions in more complicated grammars.

A type annotations such as `x:T` is typechecked in two steps:

- The first check is that an expression of type `T` can occur at that location. This is easily checked: `T` should be a subtype of the expected type.
- The second check is that `x` can be typed as a `T`. This is done by running the type annotator recursively on `x`, with `T` as expectation.


#### Evaluation contexts

Evaluation contexts implement searching behaviour: when a parsetree is matched over `e[x]`, a subtree matching `x` is searched within the tree. If no such tree is found; the match fails. When this match is found, both `x` and `e` are available as variables. 

The expression in the hole can be some advanced expression that should match the subtree. An other expression can be used in turn to construct a slightly different parsetree;

The explicit typing makes it possible to easily tag `e`, as its type `T` will already be stated by the function signature.
However, it is difficult for the typechecker to figure out what type `x` might [](URL)be. This is solved by typechecking `x` against _each_ type that might occur (directly or indirectly) as subtree in `T`. If exactly one type matches, this typing is choosen. If not, an explicit typing is demanded.

This approach only works for complex expressions. Often, the programmer only wishes to capture the first occurence of a certain syntactic form, which can be written as `e[(b:bool)]`. In order to save the programmer this boilerplate, the typechecker attempts to discover a syntactic form name in the variable type. If this name is found (as prefix), it will be inherently typed. In other words `e[bool]` is equivalent to `e[(bool:bool)]`.


\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}[style=algo]

typecheckExpression(expr, γ, T):
    case expr of:
        variable v:	return v:T
        sequence es:	
            # includes lone string literals, sequence of one
            possible_typings = []
            for choice_sequence in T.getChoices():
                if es.length != choice_sequence.length:
                    continue
                try:
                    typed_sequence = []
                    for e, t in zip(es, choice_sequence):
                        if e is literal && t is literal:
                            if e != t then:
                                error "Inconsistent application
                            else typed_sequence += e
                        else:
                            typed_sequence += typecheckExpression(e, γ, t)
                    possible_typings += typed_sequence
                catch:
                    # this doesn't match. Let's try the next choice...
            if possible_typings == []:
                error 
                    "Could not match $expr against"
                    "any choice of the corresponding syntactic form"
            if possible_typings.length() > 1:
                error 
                    "Multiple possible typings for $expr."
                    "Add an explicit type annotation"
            return possible_typings[0]
        function f(x1, x2, ...):
            (T1, T2, ..., RT)    <- γ[f]    # Lookup type of f
            x1'    = typecheckExpression(x1)
            x2'    = typecheckExpression(x2)
            if RT <: T:
                return f(x1', x2', ...) : RT
            else:
                error 
                    "Function $f does not have the desired type"
        type annotation (e:TA):
            if !(TA <: T):
                error 
                     "The typing annotation is to broad"
                     "or can never occur"
            return typecheckExpression(e, γ, TA)
        evaluation context e[x] with x a variable:
            ts = T.occuringSubtypes().filter(x.isPrefixOf)
            # occuringSubtypes are sorted on namelength
            # the first match is the best match
            t = ts[0] 
            typecheckExpression(e[(x:t)])
        evaluation context e[x]:
            ts = T.occuringSubtypes()
            possible_typings = []
            for t in ts:
                try{
                possibleTypings += typecheckExpression(x, γ, t)
                }catch():
                    # This doesn't match. Let's try the next one
            if possible_typings == []:
                error 
                    "Could not match $x against"
                    "any possible embedded syntactic form"
            if possible_typings.length() > 1:
                error 
                    "Multiple possible typings for $x."
                    "Add an explicit type annotation"
            return possible_typings[0]

\end{lstlisting}



\caption{The typechecking algorithm for meta-expressions and patterns}
\label{fig:typecheckerAlgo}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}
\begin{lstlisting}
# Checks a clause for unknown or incompatible type variables
checkClause(pattern1, pattern2, ... , expr):
    # search all the patterns for variables and their type
    assgn1 = pattern1.assignedVars()
    assgn2 = pattern2.assignedVars()
    ...

    assgnE = expr.assignedVars()

    assgns = merge(assgn1, assgn2, ...)
    
    for variable_name in assgnE.keys():
        if !assgns.contains(variable_name):
            error "Variable not defined"
        TUsage = assgnE.get(variable_name)
        TDecl = assgns.get(variable_name)    
        if !TUsage.isSubtypeOf(TDecl)):
            error "Incompatible types"

merge(assgn1, assgn2, ...):
    assgn    = {}
    for variable_name in assgn1.keys() + assgn2.keys() + ... :
        # assgn.get(T) return Top for an unknown type
        type = assgn1.get(variable_name)
               ∩ assgn2.get(variable_name)
               ∩ ...
        if type is ɛ:
            error "Incompatible types while merging assignments"
        assgn.put(variable_name, type)
    return assgn



\end{lstlisting}
\caption{Merging of variable assignemnt stores and consistent variable usage checks}
\label{fig:mergingAlgo}
\end{figure}



\clearpage

