
 Relations and Rules: building the evaluator
---------------------------------------------

While we could build a function which evaluates our programming languages, language designers love _natural deduction_ more. Don't worry if you never heard about that before, we'll explain it right away!

### Natural deduction

_Natural deduction_ is about defining __relations__. After declaring a relation, the elements that are part of the relation are defined by an __inference rule__, which looks like:


         Given predicates
	------------------ [Inference Rule Name]
	 Given conclusion


A conclusion would be, in our case, that certain elements are part of a relation.

This is Turing complete just as well. We yield this power to build the evaluator.


### Declaring evaluation

First, we declare a new section inside our _STFL.language_, with a relation declaration inside:

$$STFL.language![60..63]!file

Let us break this line down.

The first part, `(→)`, says that we declare a relation with name `→`. Except from some builtin symbols, you can use whatever string you want, including unicode[^unicodeArrow]. If you don't want to use the unicode-arrow for this tutorial, you can replace `→` by `->`.

The second part, `: expr (in), expr (out)` states that this is a relation between two `expr`. As example, `2 + 3` , `5` will be in `(→)` or written more conventionally `2 + 3 →` `5`.

What about the `(in)` and `(out)` parts? These are called the __mode__ of the argument and are to help the computer. Given `2 + 3`, it's pretty easy for the computer to calculate `5`. Given `5`, the computer can't magically deduce that this was computed by calculating `2 + 3`, especially because an infinite amount of possible calculations lead to the result `5`.

The last part, `Pronounced as "evaluation"` defines a name for the relation. It's documentation, to help users of your language to know what a relation is supposed to do or to help them searching it on a search engine.

Note that the goal of `→` is to make a small, fundamental step - just one addition or simplification, e.g. `1 + 2 + 3` `→` `1 + 5`. We'll design another relation later on which will give us the end result immediatly, giving us `6`.

[^unicodeArrow]: to enter an unicode character on a linux machine, type `Left-Ctrl + Shift + U`, release, and type the hexcode of the desired character, e.g. `2192` to get the right-arrow. On windows, hold down `Alt` and type `+ 2192` (thus: type a plus, followed by typing the number).

### Defining evaluation


#### Simple deduction rules: If

Defining relations works with one or more rules.

We start with a simple one:


$$STFLEvalIfCond.language![98..102]!file



How should you read this rule? The part under the line says that this is part of a relation, namley `→`; in other words; `"If" "True" "Then" e1 "Else" e2` will evaluate to `e1`. 
This is equivalent to writing the function clause `eval("If" "True" "Then" e1 "Else" e2) = e1`.

The part right of the line (namely `[EvalIfTrue]`) gives the name of the rule. You can use whatever you want, it is documentation as well.

Analogously, you can add a rule for `If False`:

	 
$$STFLEvalIfCond.language![102..106]!file

This is already enough to run our third example. To run a relation, specify `-r <name-of-relation>`, thus `./ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl expr -l -r →`:


$$($$STFL.language![0..90],[104..112] $$examples.stfl!3 expr -l -r → --nc)

#### Deduction rules with predicates: plus

How do we evaluate expressions with `+`? We can add a deduction rule for addition too:

$$STFL.language![99..101]!file

First, take a look at the bottom line. The left part is straightforward; we match a parsetree with form `n1 + n2`. But what is `!plus(n1, n2)`? It's a function call with arguments `n1` and `n2`. The exclamation mark `!` indicates that this is a builtin function[^BuiltinFuncs].

[^BuiltinFuncs]: An overview for all builtin functions can be found in the [reference manual](#builtin-functions).

In other words, this rule indicates that `1 + 2` should be evaluated with `!plus(1,2)`, giving `3`.

There is a catch, though. `!plus` has type `Number -> Number -> Number` (recall, this means that plus takes two `Numbers` and gives us a `Number` in return).
We can't pass in other types, or it would fail. We thus have to check that we get correct input for this rule. To do this, we have those predicates on top: `n1:Number` and `n2:Number`. Read `n1:Number` as _`n1` is of syntactic form `Number`_.

Let give this a run!

$$($$STFL.language![0..90],[99..112] $$examples.stfl!6,7 expr -l -r → --nc)

We can see that our simple example, `20 + 22` neatly gives us the answer[^tolife]. The other example, `1 + 2 + 3`, fails, giving a detailed overview of what rules it attempted to apply and why those rules failed.


[^tolife]: Luckily, your computer didn't have to run for 10 million years. And it conveniently gave the question too, so that we wouldn't forget it.

#### If with complicated conditions


But what with our fourth example, `$$examples.stfl!4`? The condition itself as an `If`-expression as well.

Herefore we introduce a more complicated rule:

$$STFLEvalIfCond.language![92..97]!file


This rule states that, whenever `cond0` evaluates to `cond1`, then we can evaluate the bigger expression.

We might also introduce two similar rules for, for evaluating the arguments of `+`, so that `1 + (2 + 3)` can be evaluated too. However, it is cumbersome to add all these extra rules for each syntactic form.


#### Evaluation contexts for congruence rules

Luckily, there is a way to write all those rules even shorter:

$$STFL.language![92..97]!file


The part `expr[expr0]` will search, within the expression we want to evaluate, a nested expression that satisfies the conditions. In other words, it will search in the parsetree (e.g. `If (If True Then False Else False) Then True Else False`) a part that can be evaluated (e.g. `If True Then False Else False`). This part will be evaluated (to `False`) and plugged back in the bigger expression.

The evaluated expression will then be put back in the original, bigger parsetree at the same location.

Make sure to name the nested expr `expr0`, thus _syntactic-form-name_ followed by a number. That's how the tool figures out what kind of parsetree to search for.

$$($$STFL.language![0..112] $$examples.stfl!4 expr -l -r → --nc --short-proofs 1)


As expected, this rule also solves our `1 + 2 + 3`! 

$$($$STFL.language![0..112] $$examples.stfl!7 expr -l -r → --nc)


These proofs are getting a bit harder to read. If you get lost, remember to always start from the bottom. 

This proof states that `1 + (2 + 3)` makes a single step to `1 + 5`, because  of rule `EvalCtx`; this rule could be used because `2 + 3` evaluates to `5`.

The proof for that part of the evaluation is given on top, by rule `EvalPlus`, which could be invoked because both `2` and `3` are `Number`s.

#### Application

As last, we'd like to apply functions, such as `(\\x : Int . x + 1) 41`.

Our intution is that, given something as `(\\x : someType . someExpr) someArg`, we want to evaluate this to `someExpr`, where we replace every `x` in `someExpr`. Luckily, a builtin function does the hard part of replacing for us: `!subs`. This gives us the following rule:

$$STFL.language!114,115!file


$$($$STFL.language![0..115] $$examples.stfl!8 expr -l -r → --nc)


### Evaluation-relation: recap

Our evaluation rule is defined as:

$$STFL.language![59..63],[86..88],[92..116]!file

### Is canonical

It is usefull to known when an expression is _canonical_, thus is fully evaluated. This can be simply stated by a relation taking just one argument and _giving no output_[^itsASet]. It should contain exactly the `Int`s, `True` and `False` (the `bool`s for short).

First, the declaration in the `Relations`-section:

$$STFL.language!65!file


And the implementation in the `Rule`-section:

$$STFL.language![120..127]!file

[^itsASet]: Mathematicians would call this a _set_.


### Bigstep


Of course, when we input `1 + 2 + 3`, we would like te get `6`, and not `1 + 5`. For this, we can define a third relation, 

First, let us declare `bigstep`:

$$STFL.language!64!file

The implementation is based on recursion. If something is canonical, we are done and just return the unchanged value. 
We express this basecase as following:

$$STFL.language![132..134]!file

What if we are not done? That means that we can make a single step, `e0 → e1` and that we calculate this `e1` to its canonical from `e2` with `bitstep` itself!

$$STFL.language![136..138]!file

So, we finally did it! Time to see our examples in all their glory!

$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!1 expr -l -r →* --nc)
$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!2 expr -l -r →* --nc)
$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!3 expr -l -r →* --short-proofs 4 --nc)

$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!5 expr -l -r →* --nc)
$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!6 expr -l -r →* --short-proofs 4 --nc)
$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!7 expr -l -r →* --short-proofs 4 --nc)
$$($$STFL.language![0..140] $$examples.stfl!8 expr -l -r →* --short-proofs 4 --nc)


