
Building the typechecker
------------------------

Now that we have some experience with natural deduction, we can slay the next dragon: the typechecker!

For those unfamiliar, the typechecker looks at the expression and determines the type of it and halts on inconsistencies, such as `1 + True` or `If True Then 0 Else False`, ...

we will build a single rule for each syntactic choice of `expr`; thu a rule for:

- The constants `True` and `False`
- The constant `Number`s
- Typing plus
- Typing `If ... Then ... Else ...`
- Typing lambda's `(\\x : T . e)`
- Typing variables `x`
- Typing application

### The typing environment

Before where start, how should we type a variable, such as `x`? Of course, this depends on the environment. In the lambda `(\\x : Int . x)`, `x` should be typed as a `Int`, while in the lambda `(\\ x : Bool . x)`, this `x` clearly is a `Bool`. 

We could type the inner expressions by substituting a simple default value in the expression, and then typing it. However, this doesn't scale to more advanced languages.

The other, more general solution is keeping track of the type of each variable. 
We declare a simple list to keep track of the types in the `Syntax Section`:

$$STFL.language!27,28!file

The `typing` represents a data entry, whereas the `typingEnvironment` can contain zero or more of these data entries, thus keeping track of the variable types. 

The typing relation is often denoted with a uppercase gamma, `Γ`. We will follow this convention[^gammaUnicode].


[^gammaUnicode]: Type `Ctrl+Shift+U 0393` on linux to input `Gamma`. On Windows, hold down `Alt` and type `+ 0393`.

### The typing relation

We're all set now! What should our typing relation look like? First, we'll want to take a `typingRelation` as input, together with an `expr`. This should be enough to calculate the `type` of the expression.

In other words, the type of the relation is `typingRelation (in), expr (in), type (out)`. In the acadical world, this is often given the symbol `⊢` [^entailsSymbol], pronounced `entails` or `out of this environment follows this typing`. 

[^entailsSymbol]: Type `Ctrl+Shift+U 22a2` on linux to input `entails`. On Windows, hold down `Alt` and type `+ 22a2`.

So, our declaration becomes:

$$STFL.language!67!file

### Typing constants `True` and `False`

It's pretty easy to type constants, such as `42` and `True`.

Let us start with typing the constant `True`. 

$$STFL.language![150..152]!file

If this looks magical: we take the typing environment as input (but don't use it), pattern match on a literal `True` and return the known type `Bool`.

We can do the same for `False`:

$$STFL.language![154..156]!file

### Typing constant `Number`s

Our next challenge is giving a type to `Int`s. Making a single rule for each number is a bit hard, especially because there is an infinite amount of them...

However, we can simply fix this by adding a predicate, checking that our input is a number:

$$STFL.language![159..161]!file

Remember that our predicates are written above the line.

### Typing against an empty environment

Let's try to run our typing relation, with `./ALGT STFL.language expr -l -r ⊢`

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!1 expr -l -r ⊢ --nc)

Well, that didn't work. The tool expects two arguments; but only one is provided...

To solve this, we declare yet another relation, in which we type an expression against an empty environment:

$$STFL.language![159..161]!file

Retrying with the new relation (`./ALGT STFL.language examples.stfl expr -l -r ::`) gives us:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl![1..2] expr -l -r :: --nc)
$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!3 expr -l -r :: --nc --short-proofs 2)



### Typing plus

Another expression we'll want to type are additions. 

Of course, this will always return an `Int`, but there is more. `True + False` is not valid, whereas `1 + 1` can be typed. In other words, we have to check that the arguments to `+` are both numbers.

We could thus type `+` as following:

         n1:Number         n2:Number
        ------------------------------				[TPlus]
         Γ ⊢ n1 "+" n2, "Int"

This works for `1 + 2`, but not for `1 + (2 + 3)`, as ` (2 + 3)` is _not_ a syntactic form that is a literal `Number`. It can be typed as `Int` though, so we can generalize our predicates by using the typing relationship recursively:

$$STFL.language![174..176]!file

Looks good! Time to give this a try:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!7 expr -l -r :: --nc --short-proofs 4)

### Typing `If`

It is pretty straightforward that the condition should be a `Bool`, which already gives a draft of the rule:

         Γ ⊢ cond, "Bool"
        ----------------------------------------------------- [TIf]
         Γ ⊢ "If" cond "Then" e1 "Else" e2,  ???

We also want to make sure that both `e1` and `e2` are correctly typed, so we recursively typecheck them:

         Γ ⊢ cond, "Bool"       Γ ⊢ e1, T1       Γ ⊢ e2, T2
        ----------------------------------------------------- [TIf]
         Γ ⊢ "If" cond "Then" e1 "Else" e2,  ???




But what type should we return? The type of `e1` or `e2`?

Consider expression `If True Then 0 Else False`. Evaluating this yields `0`. However, expression `If False Then 0 Else False` would yield `False`. In other words, depending on the runtime value of the condition, we might get a different type.

That's not behaviour we want. The types of `e1` and `e2` should be the same to function correctly. We add a predicate to check this:

         Γ ⊢ cond, "Bool"      Γ ⊢ e1, T1     Γ ⊢ e2, T2     T1 = T2
        ------------------------------------------------------------- [TIf]
         Γ ⊢ "If" cond "Then" e1 "Else" e2,  ???

Now we can also return a type; as `T1` and `T2` are the same, we just pick one:

$$STFL.language![179..181]!file


All done! Time to give it a try:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!3 expr -l -r :: --nc --short-proofs 2)

### Typing lambda's

Typing lambda's is a bit complicated. Remember that a lambda such as  `(\\x : T . e)` means that, _given `x` of type `T` as input argument, it gives back expression `e` with `x` replaced_.

 This gives us quite some clues about what to do.

Let's start with the skeleton of the rule:

         ???
        ---------------------------------------------------- [TLambda]
         Γ ⊢ "(" "\\" x ":" T1 "." e ")", ???


Of course, we'll want to type `e` jus as well. Not only to check wether it is correct, but also because we'll need it's type later on:

         Γ ⊢ e, T1
        ---------------------------------------------------- [TLambda]
         Γ ⊢ "(" "\\" x ":" T1 "." e ")", ???

This is close to what we want, but there is a catch though: in the expression `e`, we know that `x` has the type `T1`. We should pass this knowledge to the typing of `e`, by adding it to the typing environment `Γ`:

         (x ":" T1) "," Γ ⊢ e, T2
        ---------------------------------------------------- [TLambda]
         Γ ⊢ "(" "\\" x ":" T1 "." e ")", ???

So far, so good! The only question remaining is what type we should return. We know we have input of type `T1` and output of type `T2`. Thats where our `->` comes into play: the entire lambda has type `T1 -> T2`!

There is a little technicality into play here though: `T1` might be some complicated type, such as `Int -> Bool` - meaning we expect a _function_ as input argument. If we would write `Int -> Bool -> T2`, that would be read as funcion taking _two_ arguments: first a `Int`, followed by a `Bool`. Not quite the same thus. 

The fix for this is simple: add parentheses. The type of a lambda is  `(T1) -> T2`.

Typing this out as rule yields:

$$STFL.language![185..187]!file

Note that an extra pair of parentheses was added; one pair is between double quotes, denoting that this should be added in the parse tree; the other pair just groups them together to help the tool build the parsetree.

### Typing variables

Before we can see typing of lambda's live, we need to take another hurdle: typing variables.

You'll probably think it'll be a lot of work to design the searching behaviour, but luckily, there is a special construction that does exactly that. Remember the evaluation context? We can use this builtin here too:

$$STFL.language![169..171]!file

Quite succint! If you're a bit puzzled about its workings, we stated to ALGT that it should search a typing of `x`, where `x` is exactly the name of the variable we want to type.

At this point, we can finally type a single lambda:

$$($$STFL.language $$examplelambda.stfl expr -l -r :: --nc)

### Typing application

The typechecker is nearly complete, only a single syntactic form can't be typed yet: application of the form `function argument`.

How can we tackle this problem? For starters, we'll have to type the `function` and `argument`

         Γ ⊢ func, TFunc     Γ ⊢ arg, TArg
        --------------------------------------------------- [TApp]
         Γ ⊢ func arg, ???

A function has a determined input argument, also known as the _domain_ of the function. To be well typed, the domain should match the type of the argument exactly. But how can we get this argument?

Luckily, we created a function earlier on that calculates exactly that! We can simply use `domain` and check that it's result equals `TArg`:

         Γ ⊢ func, TFunc     Γ ⊢ arg, TArg     domain(TFunc) = TArg
        --------------------------------------------------- [TApp]
         Γ ⊢ func arg, ???

Nearly done! Only question left is what type we should return.

This is pretty straighforward too, as we earlier made the function `codomain` which exactly calculates the return type of `TFunc`

$$STFL.language![191..193]!file

All finished now, except for trying of course:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!8 expr -l -r :: --nc --short-proofs 4)

Evaluator and typechecker: recap
---------------------------------------------------

Our declared relations are:

$$STFL.language![60..71]!file

The definitiion of those relations are:


$$STFL.language![87..216]!file

Running the relation `::` on all our examples with flags `./ALGT STFL.language $$examples.stfl expr -l -r :: --no-check` gives:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl![1..3],[5..8] expr -l -r :: --nc --short-proofs 2)
