  Properties
----------------

The last fundamental part of our language are it's properties.

Arbitrary properties can be stated just like rules can. 

ALGT will check that these properties hold, by trying a bunch of random examples, effectively quickchecking your language implementation.


As most languages are concerned about two important properties, _preservation_ and _progress_, we will work these out too.

### Stating Preservation

_Preservation_ is the property that, when an expression `e0` of type `T` is evaluated, the new expression `e1` is still of type `T`. Without this property, our typechecker would be useless...

Now, we can state this property in the `Properties`-section of the file:

$$STFL.language![219..224]!file

This is the same as a rule in a relation: given the predicates (`e0 :: T` and `e0 → e1`), the consequent (`e1 :: T`) can always be proven.

As our implementation is correct, we can just run our program as following, and see it did try to proof us wrong:

$$($$STFL.language![1..225])![12..14]

We can ask ALGT to try more examples, with the `--quickcheck-runs NUMBER-OF-RUNS` flag:

$$($$STFL.language![1..225] --quickcheck-runs 25)![12..14]


Note that we can also run these properties on our own examples, with `--test-property NAME OF PROPERTY --ppp` or `--test-all-properties --ppp`. By default, property proofs are not printed (as they tend to be long), `--ppp` says to Print the Property Proofs.

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!1 expr -l --tp Progress --ppp --nc)

### Stating progress

Another important property is _progress_. This states that, if an expression is well-typed, it either is in canonical form (a simple value) or we can evaluate for another step.

This is quite an important check to, as it means we can't have a _stuck_ state, in which the evaluation doesn't know how to progress. Turing complete programming language (which __STFL__ is _not_) might get stuck in a infinite loop though, but it is because a certain expression would yield exactly the same expression, but with at least some steps in between.

This property can be stated as following:

$$STFL.language![227..229]!file


Here, _choice_ is used in the consequent: given the predicates (`e0 :: T`), at least one of the choices must be proven:

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!1 expr -l --tp Progress --ppp --nc)

$$($$STFL.language $$examples.stfl!3 expr -l --tp Progress --ppp --nc --short-proofs 3)

Does ALGT find counterexamples for this property?

$$($$STFL.language![1..221],[227..229])![12..14]

Phew! No counterexamples found! Our language is probably _sound_.


### Disabling quickchecks and symbolic checks

If the quickchecks take to long, you can disable them, using `--quickcheck-runs 0`. When the other checks takes to long (such as minimal typing of functions, liveability and totality), add `--no-check` to disable them all.

