Syntax Styling
--------------

As a bonus, syntax styling is supported out of the box just as well! While this is not a fundamental aspect of a programming language, it is quite fun - and important when presenting.

### Declaring the syntax style

The syntax style is defined in a section `Syntax Style` just beneath the actual syntax:

$$$STFLStyled.language![30..32]!file


You can map a syntactic form onto a style:

$$$STFLStyled.language!33,34!file

These say that both `type` and `typeTerm` should be rendered with style `type`.

It's also possible to pick a choice of a syntactic form, by choosing the zero-based[^zerobased] index:

[^zerobased]: As all sane computer languages, the first choiced is assigned index `0`, the second is index `1`, ...

$$$STFLStyled.language!41!file

This would take the first choice of term, thus the one with "If", "Then" and "Else" and render those as keywords. The nested expressions will be rendered independently.

As a quick reminder, the syntax of term is.
$$$STFLStyled.language![22..26]!file


The full syntax style is:
$$$STFLStyled.language![30..]!file


This yields the following result:

$$$!($$$STFLStyled.language $$$examplestyle.stfl expr -l --latex --style Terminal --nc)!2


### Other color schemes

If you don't like the _green-on-black_ color scheme, other color schemes are provided as well. Select one with the `--style`-flag.

$$$styles

Giving:


Style			Output
--------------		--------------------------------------------------
White			$$$!($$$STFLStyled.language $$$examplestyle.stfl expr -l --latex --style White --nc)!2
WhiteFlat		$$$!($$$STFLStyled.language $$$examplestyle.stfl expr -l --latex --style WhiteFlat --nc)!2
Terminal		$$$!($$$STFLStyled.language $$$examplestyle.stfl expr -l --latex --style Terminal --nc)!2
Cobalt			$$$!($$$STFLStyled.language $$$examplestyle.stfl expr -l --latex --style Cobalt --nc)!2


You can also define and specify your own color scheme; see the reference manual.
